+++ 
draft = false
date = 2026-01-19T01:41:34-06:00
title = "3,500 Miles in 2025"
slug = "3500-miles-2025" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

{{< center-img src="../../static/3500_miles_2025_0.jpeg" alt="3500-miles-2025-0" >}}

A few months ago I wrote [Make it Possible, Then Make it
Normal](https://danielmangum.com/posts/possible-then-normal/), in which I
described unceremoniously running my 3,000th mile of 2025 nearly two months
before the year concluded. While I didn’t have a total mileage goal for the
year, after hitting 3,000 with time to spare I naturally locked on to trying to
reach 3,500. I crossed the threshold on December 30th, 2025 and finished with a
final tally of 3,507.9 miles.

Reaching 3,500 miles was perhaps the least eventful running milestone in the
last two months of the year. What I didn’t mention in that post was that I had
two marathons remaining in 2025, and I had come into the year with a goal of
getting a qualifying entry to the Boston Marathon in 2027.

## The Wild World of Major Marathon Qualification

World major marathon entry is quite confusing for those who are not well versed
in the sport. Part of the issue is that every marathon has a slightly different
process, with multiple avenues to being able to actually run in the race. Most
races have some allotment of slots for runners with “qualifying times”. To get
one of these slots, a runner has to run a fast enough time in a race where the
course has been certified as eligible for qualification. Typically around a year
before the race, qualifying standards for the various permutations of gender and
age group are released and there is a window in which runners have an
opportunity to achieve the standard, then apply for entry.

In the United States, there are three world majors: Boston, Chicago, and New
York City. Chicago has the most straightforward process: they set a qualifying
time and essentially everyone who qualifies gets entry into the race. For
example, when I [ran the Chicago Marathon in
2024](https://danielmangum.com/posts/better-to-fail-spectacularly/) the
qualifying time for my age group (Men / 16-34) was 3:05. I had run a [3:03 at
the Ventura Marathon in
2023](https://danielmangum.com/posts/3000-miles-2023/#most-fun-run-ventura-marathon),
which was within the qualifying window for Chicago 2024.

Boston and New York City are more complicated. They similarly set a qualifying
time, but based on the number of people that apply as qualifiers, they will cut
the time further and a fairly large number of people who “qualified” won’t
actually get to run. Over the past few years, the qualifying and subsequent
cutoff times have been dropping precipitously. For example, the qualifying time
for the Chicago Marathon for the Men / 16-34 group in 2026 is 2:50 — 15 minutes
faster than what I had to run to qualify in 2024!

Boston released the [2026 and 2027
qualifying](https://www.baa.org/races/boston-marathon/qualify/) times together,
with the Men / 16-34 time set at 2:55. Because I was targeting 2027, I had the
benefit of seeing what the cutoff time ended up being for 2026 ([4 minutes and
34
seconds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_Marathon_Qualifying_Standards)). I
knew going into these last two races that I would almost certainly need to be
running sub-2:50, and that every second that I could shave off would be
valuable.

## The Richmond Marathon (November 15, 2025)

Considering I had come into the year with my PR sitting at just over 2:55 (my
time from Chicago in 2024), running sub-2:50 would be quite the stretch. I had
already run one marathon in 2025, and it was a brutal experience. Due to a very
busy Spring, I had signed up for the [Jackson River
Marathon](https://jacksonrivermarathon.com/) in Virginia in June. Anyone who has
spent any time in the Southeast United States knows that June is not the time
you want to be attempting to PR a marathon. I ran a 3:03, which wasn’t too bad
considering the conditions, but I left that race wondering if my performance in
Chicago had been a fluke.

Nevertheless, I had a strong Fall season and a decent build towards the
[Richmond Marathon](https://www.richmondmarathon.org/) in November. Richmond is
not the easiest course, but the race is known for being well organized (it is
literally referred to as “America’s Friendliest Marathon”) and relatively fast.
We had a good crew from my local Durham running group, Monday Night Track Club
(MNTC), heading up together, with some folks running the full and others opting
for the half. My wife, Katie, also made the trip, and getting to see her at the
end is always the best part of any race.

A lot of things went right in Richmond on November 15th. The weather was
perfect: cold, but not cold enough to require wearing multiple layers. I started
the race alone, but saw a group of Durham folks from Bull City Track Club,
another local run group, ahead fairly early on in the race. I made a somewhat
risky decision to pick up the pace to catch up and stick onto their pack. They
had run Richmond in the past and were able to provide realtime advice on pacing
and race strategy. Chatting with them made the miles pass quickly.

Fueling, an area I have historically struggled in, also went fairly well. I used
my typical strategy of taking a Maurten gel every ~3-4 miles, but supplemented
them with some chews about halfway through, and half of a banana with about 10k
to go. I think the latter saved me from cramping, which is what had derailed me
more than a year ago in Chicago.

Independent of time, one of my goals for the year was to feel strong at the end
of a marathon. In the past, I’ve had races where I totally fell apart down the
stretch, but even in the races where my pace remained steady, I still crossed
the finish line feeling like I was about to collapse. I was ready for the same
grind over the last few miles at Richmond, but I kept bringing down my pace and
the pain never came. With around 2 miles left, I finally let myself believe that
it was just going to be a good day.

As I came in towards the extremely steep finish of the Richmond course, I saw
Katie and my friends who had already completed the half marathon. As they
cheered me on, all I could do was smile and try not to let too much of the
disbelief I was feeling inside show on my face. I crossed the finish line and
stopped, but for the first time it wasn’t because I felt like I couldn’t take
another step. As I looked down at my watch, a year of long runs and tough races
played on fast-forward in my mind.

2:47.

{{< center-img src="../../static/3500_miles_2025_1.jpeg" alt="3500-miles-2025-1" >}}

> Katie's signs remain undefeated.

**Richmond Marathon Pacing**

| Mile | Pace (m:ss) | Elevation (ft) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 6:42 | 27 |
| 2 | 6:34 | -4 |
| 3 | 6:32 | -7 |
| 4 | 6:38 | 32 |
| 5 | 6:30 | -5 |
| 6 | 6:28 | 18 |
| 7 | 6:28 | -111 |
| 8 | 6:33 | -32 |
| 9 | 6:34 | -6 |
| 10 | 6:40 | 56 |
| 11 | 6:22 | -20 |
| 12 | 6:32 | 83 |
| 13 | 6:19 | -20 |
| 14 | 6:18 | -45 |
| 15 | 6:18 | -62 |
| 16 | 6:23 | 71 |
| 17 | 6:21 | 39 |
| 18 | 6:25 | 33 |
| 19 | 6:07 | -32 |
| 20 | 6:12 | 12 |
| 21 | 6:07 | -2 |
| 22 | 6:08 | -10 |
| 23 | 6:17 | -5 |
| 24 | 6:09 | -22 |
| 25 | 6:07 | 14 |
| 26 | 5:59 | -36 |
| 26.2 | 5:25 | -90 |

## The Rocket City Marathon (December 14, 2025)

It is typically not advisable to run marathons less than a month apart, but one
of my closest friends, Avery, was building to his first marathon after running
the half at Richmond, and I couldn’t turn down the chance to try to go sub-2:45
before the year ended. The [Huntsville “Rocket City”
Marathon](https://www.rocketcitymarathon.run/) is one of the last races of the
Fall season, with the typically mild Alabama December weather and relatively
flat terrain providing a great environment for fast times.

Unfortunately, the weather was absolutely brutal. At the start line, the
temperature was 24 degrees Fahrenheit, but high velocity winds made the “feels
like” temperature a crisp 7 degrees. Somehow, it got even colder throughout the
race. To add insult to injury (or perhaps the other way around), by mile 4 my
stomach was churning and I badly needed to visit a restroom. I kept going, but
the discomfort never went away. My motto going into this race was “give yourself
a chance”, so I gritted my teeth and tried to keep 2:45 in range.

One thing that kept me going was getting to see my parents multiple times
throughout the race. Huntsville is not too far from Nashville, TN, the city
where I grew up. They travelled down to Huntsville with me and Avery, and they
provided some much needed encouragement as we trudged our way towards the finish
line.

2:45 was not in the cards, but I crossed the finish line at 2:50, a time I felt
okay about considering the conditions. Most of all, it made me feel like
Richmond was real, and that with more work I could eventually get to 2:45.
Making the day even better, Avery had an awesome marathon debut, and we were
able to commiserate about how terrible it was to run directly into a headwind
for the last 2 miles.

{{< center-img src="../../static/3500_miles_2025_2.jpeg" alt="3500-miles-2025-2" >}}

> Avery and I after finishing the Rocket City Marathon. It was the first race I
> had ever run that finished indoors, which, considering the weather, was an
> extremely welcome quirk.

**Rocket City Marathon Pacing**

| Mile | Pace (m:ss) | Elevation (ft) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 6:26 | -4 |
| 2 | 6:20 | 20 |
| 3 | 6:18 | 1 |
| 4 | 6:26 | -1 |
| 5 | 6:24 | 19 |
| 6 | 6:27 | 10 |
| 7 | 6:11 | 15 |
| 8 | 6:20 | -32 |
| 9 | 6:18 | 31 |
| 10 | 6:17 | 16 |
| 11 | 6:18 | -23 |
| 12 | 6:17 | -20 |
| 13 | 6:18 | -10 |
| 14 | 6:16 | -27 |
| 15 | 6:13 | -9 |
| 16 | 6:22 | 14 |
| 17 | 6:16 | 29 |
| 18 | 6:24 | 0 |
| 19 | 6:16 | 12 |
| 20 | 6:17 | -30 |
| 21 | 6:22 | -18 |
| 22 | 6:24 | 31 |
| 23 | 6:38 | -7 |
| 24 | 6:39 | -39 |
| 25 | 6:43 | -4 |
| 26 | 6:27 | 14 |
| 26.2 | 6:07 | 3 |

## Looking Ahead to 2026

So where to go from here? Durham received some exciting news at the end of 2025
with the announcement of the [Garmin Durham
Marathon](https://www.garmin.com/en-US/garmin-marathon-series/durham/race-information/course/),
which will take place in May 2026. Outside of that, I’ll be back for a sixth
year at the [Blue Ridge Relay](https://www.blueridgerelay.com/), then I’m headed
back to Chicago in October! Though it is incredibly unlikely I will make the
very aggressive cutoff time for New York City, I’ll cross my fingers and apply
as a qualifier. Then it’ll be time to turn my attention to Boston in 2027.

I would consider 2025 somewhat of a breakthrough year for me when it comes to
running, which is interesting considering that life outside of running was
generally pretty hard and chaotic. Running is certainly not the only way to
learn more about yourself, but it is surely one of the most visceral. I think
with so many things feeling like they were outside of my control in 2025,
running offered a respite where I could continue to explore the limits of what
is possible. Running past, or even running headlong into my limits is where I
find some of my greatest joy in life.

Running is a privilege, and I’m incredibly grateful to all of the people in my
life that make it possible and run alongside me. Andrei, Ethan, Avery, Alex,
Katelyn, Karen, Xander, Langston, Paul, Jules… there are too many to name. Most
of all, thank you to Katie. Because of you, I never explore alone.
