+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-01-19T20:47:35-06:00
title = "Building a CI / CD Pipeline on AWS Using CloudFormation"
slug = "building-a-ci-cd-pipeline-on-aws-using-cloudformation" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

DevOps has been one of the most prominent trends in software development over the past few years. Not only does it improve the efficiency of creating software, but it also codifies the processes for testing and integrating new features and updates.

As of 2018, Amazon Web Services controlled 47% of the cloud provider market. They have a slew of managed services for everything from object storage to natural language processing. Naturally, as the shift to a DevOps mindset began to permeate its partner organizations, AWS saw the need to add integrated tools to perform Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI / CD) workflows. Today we will briefly cover how to use the AWS CodePipeline tool (with a splash of CodeCommit, CodeBuild, and CodeDeploy behind the the scenes). Furthermore, we will make heavy use of AWS CloudFormation, their Infrastructure as Code (IaC) solution.

## Getting Started

CodePipeline is flexible in allowing a variable amount of stages for your CI / CD process. We will use 4 stages for our pipeline:

- **Source (GitHub)**: where we will keep the source code
- **Build (AWS CodeBuild)**: environment that runs our build scripts to compile the code
- **Approval (Manual with AWS SNS)**: emails the designated party for approval to deploy the build
- **Deploy (AWS CodeDeploy)**: deploy compiled code

## Defining our Pipeline in CloudFormation YAML Templates

YAML is a serialization language that is commonly used to define configurations. You may be familiar with infrastructure configuration tools like Puppet that use YAML.
