+++ 
draft = false
date = 2024-01-22T00:10:34-06:00
title = "RISC-V Bytes: Soldering the Pinecil Breakout Board"
slug = "risc-v-bytes-soldering-pinecil-breakout-board"
tags = []
categories = ["RISC-V Bytes"]
+++

> This post is the first in a RISC-V Bytes subseries on the
> [PINE64](https://pine64.org/) Pinecil soldering iron and development board.
> Subsequent posts can be found under the [RISC-V
> Bytes](https://danielmangum.com/categories/risc-v-bytes/) category.

{{< center-img src="../../static/risc_v_pinecil_breakout_header.png"
alt="risc-v-pinecil-breakout-header" >}}

I've been using the
[Pinecil](https://pine64.com/product/pinecil-smart-mini-portable-soldering-iron/)
as my primary soldering iron for a few months now. The neat thing about the
Pinecil is that it is not only a highly portable USB-C powered iron, but it is
also an interesting RISC-V development board. In fact, the [Pinecil
wiki](https://wiki.pine64.org/wiki/Pinecil) lists this as an explicit goal.

> Other irons only care if they can solder. The Pinecil is held to an additional
> standard; how well can it meet the needs of the open source community as a
> RISC-V development tool. It includes hardware features not found on other
> soldering irons such as BLE Bluetooth in the V2 in order to support FOSS
> community feature requests for both fun and science.

On top of this, the Pinecil also runs open source
[IronOS](https://github.com/Ralim/IronOS) making it straightforward to modify
and update its firmware. We'll have plenty of fun with that in future posts, but
step one in using the Pinecil as a development board is assembling the [breakout
board](https://pine64.com/product/pinecil-break-out-board/), which provides
access to JTAG, ADC/DAC, I2C, UART, and SPI on the board.

{{< center-img src="../../static/risc_v_pinecil_breakout_0.jpg"
alt="risc-v-pinecil-breakout-0" >}}

The board comes with a single-row male header pin strip (20x1), as well as a
double-row male 10-pin header strip (5x2). The 10-pin strip is for the JTAG
breakout, while the single-row strip can be broken up into five groups of 4-pin
headers for the remaining protocol breakouts.

{{< center-img src="../../static/risc_v_pinecil_breakout_1.jpg"
alt="risc-v-pinecil-breakout-1" >}}

If you have a breadboard available, you can stick the long ends of the male pins
into the breadboard, then place the breakout board on top with the short ends
sticking through. The through-holes in the breakout board are nicely aligned
such that the vertical distance between each group is one row.

{{< center-img src="../../static/risc_v_pinecil_breakout_2.jpg"
alt="risc-v-pinecil-breakout-2" >}}

I started with just two groups of header pins, but placing them all before
beginning soldering will allow you to avoid having to pull the breakout board
out of the breadboard before you are done with all header pins. To solder
through-hole header pins, touch the tip of your iron to one side of the pad,
then apply solder to the other side of the pad. The solder should flow around
the pad, resulting in a strong joint.

{{< center-img src="../../static/risc_v_pinecil_breakout_3.jpg"
alt="risc-v-pinecil-breakout-3" >}}

> This was not my finest soldering work, but it got the job done.

With the header pins in place, we are ready to start using the Pinecil as a
development board. In our next post, we'll see how we can connect to the
breakout board to start interacting with the RISC-V microcontroller.
