+++ 
draft = false
date = 2023-10-20T00:10:34-06:00
title = "A Particularly Gnarly Case of Go’s Non-Nil Interfaces"
slug = "go-gnarly-non-nil-interfaces"
tags = []
+++


Most seasoned Go programmers are familiar with the memory representation of an
`interface`. In fact, [A Tour of Go](https://go.dev/tour), the canonical
starting point for new Go programmers, makes sure to describe how `interface`
values [contain a value and a type](https://go.dev/tour/methods/11) (for a more
specific description, see Russ Cox’s blog post on [how interfaces are
implemented](https://research.swtch.com/interfaces)), and even goes so far as to
distinguish between [`interface` values with `nil` underlying
values](https://go.dev/tour/methods/12) and [`nil` `interface`
values](https://go.dev/tour/methods/13). This is explained in the context of
calling methods on a `nil` value, a pattern that Go permits. In theory, a
defensive programmer could check if a pointer receiver was `nil` in every method
that accessed a member of the receiver.

```go
type Thing struct {
	Member string
}

func (t *Thing) GetMember() string {
	if t == nil {
		return "nil"
	}
	return t.Member
}
```

In practice, it is somewhat rare to do so, in part because if the caller
instantiates the type, they already know if it is `nil` or not, and if the
author of the type defines a constructor (e.g. `NewThing()`) they can return an
`error` alongside a `nil` `*Thing` if construction fails.

However, the fact that interfaces containing `nil` values are themselves not
`nil` can lead to somewhat odd behavior. In the following example, the
assignment of `t` to `i` is setting the underlying type of `i` to `*Thing` and
the underlying value of `i` to `nil`.

```go
func main() {
	var t *Thing
	var i any
	fmt.Println(t == nil)
	fmt.Println(i == nil)
	i = t
	fmt.Println(t == nil)
	fmt.Println(i == nil)
}
```

Therefore, prior to assignment the value of `i` is `nil`, while after assignment
of a `nil` value it is not.

```go
true // t pre-assignment
true // i pre-assignment
true // t post-assignment
false // i post-assignment
```

This scenario is somewhat contrived, and a reasonable case could be made that
this type of explicit assignment makes it clear that we are initializing the
underlying type of the `interface`. Upon seeing this, one could be tempted to
declare that "assigning to an `interface` initializes it". Unfortunately, that
would be incorrect. Consider the following slight adjustment to our example.

```go
func main() {
	var t any
	var i any
	fmt.Println(t == nil)
	fmt.Println(i == nil)
	i = t
	fmt.Println(t == nil)
	fmt.Println(i == nil)
}
```

Now `t` is itself an `interface`, but its value is still `nil`. Assigning `t` to
`i` does not initialize `i`. In other words, assigning an `interface` to an
`interface` is similar to assigning the underlying type and value, which are
both `nil` in this case.

```go
true // t pre-assignment
true // i pre-assignment
true // t post-assignment
true // i post-assignment
```

Though these examples illustrate potential stumbling blocks, they have been
[detailed](https://jeremymikkola.com/posts/2017_03_29_know_your_nil.html) at
[length](https://blog.urth.org/2021/03/27/down-the-golang-nil-rabbit-hole/) in
posts over the years. However, the most frequent issues with `nil` interfaces,
in my experience, arise when nesting functions.

```go
func NewThing() *Thing {
	return nil
}

func NewI() any {
	return NewThing()
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println(NewThing() == nil)
	fmt.Println(NewI() == nil)
}
```

At first glance, one might read the preceding code and think "`NewI()` returns
`NewThing()`, which always returns `nil`. Therefore `NewI()` always returns
`nil`.” As we know from our previous examples, that is not the case. In fact,
this example mirrors the first, except for that the type declarations are in the
function signatures rather than on variable declarations, making the behavior
less obvious.

```go
true // NewThing() == nil
false // NewI() == nil
```

Similarly to the second example, if we changed the return type of `NewThing()`
to `any`, the same example would yield the following results.

```go
true // NewThing() == nil
true // NewI() == nil
```

I generally adhere to the "accept interfaces, return structs" principle (with a
few exceptions), but when recently implementing a `net.Listener`, which requires
an `Accept() (net.Conn, error)` method, I found myself wrapping a function that
returned a struct pointer that implemented `net.Conn`. Fortunately, when calling
`Accept()`, we can check the `error` return value and a well designed
`net.Listener` will return a non-nil `error` any time that the `net.Conn` return
value (or its underlying value) would be `nil`. However, it is somewhat
unfortunate that checking `net.Conn == nil` does not give us any indication as
to whether calling a method on the value may result in a panic due to
dereferencing a `nil` pointer.

I’ve seen comments online that argue that this is a bug in the language, which I
would push back on. Though one may disagree with the design choices, the
behavior is well-specified. That being said, relying on programmers to not make
mistakes is usually not a recipe for success.
