+++ 
draft = false
date = 2023-10-06T00:10:34-06:00
title = "The Value of Livestreaming Long-Term Projects"
slug = "value-livestreaming-long-term"
tags = []
categories = ["moss"]
+++

This is less of a blog post, and more of a collection of Friday thoughts that
occurred to me on my morning run. Last night I was [livestreaming some
work](https://www.youtube.com/live/_uR2fhZDXkE) on a new
[`moss`](https://github.com/mosscomp/moss) blog post in which I describe the use
of [Look-Up Tables
(LUTs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lookup_table#Hardware_LUTs) as storage
elements on an FPGA (this will be published in a few days). However, I ended up
spending the majority of the time scouring the internet for documentation on the
relationship between 5-input LUTs (`LUT5`) and 6-input LUTs (`LUT6`) on [Xilinx
7 Series
FPGAs](https://www.xilinx.com/products/silicon-devices/fpga/artix-7.html). It
was a pretty boring watch, unless you enjoy long periods of continuous silence,
occasionally interrupted by a large exhale or incoherent muttering.

Reflecting on this stream, and others I have done in the past, I started to
think about the value they are or are not providing. Specifically, I was
thinking about the nature of the `moss` project, which is part of [my three year
commitment to chip
design](https://danielmangum.com/posts/a-three-year-bet-on-chip-design/), and
whether livestreaming is more or less useful when focused on long-term projects.
The following motivations came to mind.

1. **It provides regularity.**
    
    Succeeding in long-term projects requires constantly pushing the ball
    forward. Finding time every day, every week, or every month to do that can
    be challenging, especially if the project is secondary to other
    responsibilities. Regular livestreaming is not necessarily superior to just
    setting aside the requisite time to do the work, but it does create some
    public accountability around it.
    
2. **It creates space for community.**
    
    At times I have started livestreaming expecting no one to show up for the
    duration of the (typically quite long) stream. This is a totally acceptable
    outcome for me. However, I am regularly surprised that folks show up in the
    chat, ask questions, provide feedback, or just want to hang out. Strong
    communities are built over long periods of time, and providing a space early
    on in a project’s lifecycle gets that journey started.
    
3. **It ties a tangible output to the inevitable periods of toil.**
    
    Sometimes I am jealous of folks who are able to go long periods of time
    without producing tangible output and not get anxious about it. In fact,
    getting more comfortable with that mode of operation has been one of the
    biggest areas of growth for me as I have taken on more and more
    responsibilities throughout my career. However, whether due to nature or
    nurture, I am always going to be a person who loves building tangible
    things. Working on `moss` stress tests this desire because there is a fair
    amount of research and experimentation required for me to ramp up my
    expertise in both concepts and tooling. Livestreaming during those periods
    helps satiate my desire to make something.
    
4. **It debunks the “overnight success” phenomenon.**
    
    To the outside world, successful long-term projects frequently appear as
    though they were built overnight. Sometimes it can be tempting for the
    builders themselves to lean into that narrative. I’d like to think I
    wouldn’t capitulate to that portrayal, but having an archive with hours and
    hours of me stumbling through datasheets is some nice insurance.
    
5. **It captures authentic moments of clarity.**
    
    One of the things I want to capture during my learning and building is the
    moments when a concept “clicks”. Sometimes hours of reading and thinking
    precede that critical instant of understanding, and if you can help other
    folks get there faster than you did then you are providing some real value.
    While I try to ensure that I take note when those moments occur when I’m not
    livestreaming, I can be certain they are enshrined when I am already
    recording myself working.
    
6. **It helps you hone your public speaking skills.**
    
    While I joke about how dull my livestreams can be, there are moments when I
    take what I have been reading or doing and verbally synthesize them for the
    audience. Already being live makes those opportunities readily available. In
    a single livestream, I may give 10-20 small presentations. While these
    aren’t the same as talks I have given to rooms full of people, there is
    still some of the same underlying pressure of folks you don’t know watching
    and evaluating you. Having access to a forum in which you can practice
    presenting under pressure in a relatively low stakes environment helps you
    improve skills you also use when presenting to a larger audience.
    

With these in mind, I’ll continue to livestream for now, and encourage others
working on large, long-term, public projects to do the same. [Come hang
out](https://www.youtube.com/@hasheddan/streams) as we build `moss`, and feel
free to reach out if you have feedback or requests for any of the content I am
making along the way!
