+++ 
draft = false
date = 2023-11-06T00:10:34-06:00
title = "Supercon 2023 Day 3: badgecase.io"
slug = "supercon-2023-day-3"
tags = []
+++

{{< center-img src="../../static/supercon_2023_3_cover.jpg" alt="supercon-2023-3-cover" >}}

> Screenshot of Badgecase gallery page.

The final day of Supercon 2023 had more great talks, including an incredible
recollection of [Restoring the Apollo Guidance
Computer](https://www.youtube.com/live/Ky9aYtN3qT4). However, the real highlight
was seeing all of the various badge hacks starting to take their final form,
ultimately culminating with the [Badge Hacking
Ceremony](https://www.youtube.com/live/11Js0cOif4c?t=2622) at the end of the
day.

Mike and I had made enough progress on Saturday after pivoting away from our PIO
/ DMA exploits that the remaining work on Sunday morning primarily revolved
around final hardware setup and managing DNS records (riveting stuff I know!).
It was important for us to get this done early, because our demo involved
attendee participation. After about an hour,
[badgecase.io](https://supercon23.badgecase.io) was officially live!

Badgecase works by taking the pixel data from the sketching application
[mentioned in yesterday's
post](https://danielmangum.com/posts/supercon-2023-day-2/), delivering it over
I2C to an [nRF9160](https://www.nordicsemi.com/products/nrf9160) on an [Aludel
Mini dev
board](https://projects.golioth.io/reference-designs/greenhouse-controller/#parts-list)
(designed by our coworker and Supercon O.G. [Chris
Gammell](https://chrisgammell.com/)), which sends it up as
[CBOR](https://cbor.io/) [CoAP](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7252)
payloads to [Golioth](https://golioth.io/). From there, the Badgecase backend, a
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
[`tokio-rs/axum`](https://github.com/tokio-rs/axum) webserver I had been hacking
on throughout the weekend, receives the data from Golioth over
[websockets](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API),
decodes it, renders a PNG, and uploads it to a [Google Cloud
Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage) bucket. When requests are made to
[badgecase.io](https://supercon23.badgecase.io) or
[supercon23.badgecase.io](https://supercon23.badgecase.io), the same application
renders HTML that displays a gallery of all images in the bucket.

{{< center-img src="../../static/supercon_2023_3_1.jpg" alt="supercon-2023-3-1" >}}

> Our full hardware setup.

There were a few interesting optimizations, both for performance and speed of
development, that we made throughout building the demo. First, because many of
the images contained primarily white background pixels, we opted to only send
color pixels up to Golioth. In addition, Mike was able to pack the x and y
coorindates, as well as the color, into a 16-bit integer. Because we were
working with a 40x40 pixel canvas, we needed 6 bits each for the x and y values,
which left us with 4 bits for color encoding. The sketch application only
supported white, black, red, green, and blue, so 4 bits was more than enough.

```
XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXX
  x      y      c
```

Nevertheless, with more detailed sketches, we were unable to stuff all of the
data into a single CoAP message, so points were fragmented across multiple
messages, with the first providing metadata including the total number of
expected points. Also tucked in that metadata was the name of the sketch, which
was picked by the author and delivered to the
[nRF9160](https://www.nordicsemi.com/products/nrf9160) prior to sending the
pixel data via a Golioth [Remote Procedure Call
(RPC)](https://docs.golioth.io/firmware/golioth-firmware-sdk/remote-procedure-call).

On the backend, these fragmented points were re-assembled, and used to encode a
PNG image using the Rust [`image` crate](https://crates.io/crates/image). The
name of the sketch, and a unique ID that was generated on the device and
included in the first message's metadata, were used to form a name for the image
when uploading to the bucket. On each request for
[badgecase.io](https://supercon23.badgecase.io/), the HTML page was rendered by
listing all objects in the bucket, parsing the names for metadata, and passing
it to a [handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com/) template engine. While I would
not recommend using a blob storage bucket as your database, doing so minimized
the dependencies of the application. Furthermore, because
[badgecase.io](https://supercon23.badgecase.io/) is running on [Google Cloud
Run](https://cloud.google.com/run), authorizing access from the container to the
bucket was seamless.

In between attending talks and having impromptu conversations with other
attendess, Mike and I were able to collect a small gallery of sketches that
folks at the conference, and those following at home, could see updating in real
time. By the end of the day, we here able to [show off a
demo](https://www.youtube.com/live/Ky9aYtN3qT4) that included images from many
of the attendess in the audience. It is worth watching the entire badge hacking
ceremony as ours was just one in a fascinating display of creativy and
engineering.

Outside of our Badgecase shenanigans, a few personal highlights from Day 3 for
me included meeting [Tom Verbeure](https://tomverbeure.github.io/) and [Time
"mithro" Ansell](https://github.com/mithro). I have been following both of these
folks for quite some time, and their work and writing has been a huge
inspiration for me as I have explored FPGAs and chip design. Tim was also nice
enough to give me a
[Fomu](https://www.hackster.io/news/the-fomu-an-fpga-that-fits-in-your-usb-port-1b09560b5541)!

{{< center-img src="../../static/supercon_2023_3_2.jpg" alt="supercon-2023-3-2" >}}

> The Fomu!

Meeting both of them, as well as getting to have an extended conversation with
[Matt Venn](https://www.mattvenn.net/) of
[TinyTapeout](https://tinytapeout.com/) fame the day before, was an incredible
opportunity, and I hope the work that I do will someday have a similar level of
impact. The other highlight was getting to spend the weekend hacking with Mike.
He did so much to make my first Supercon an awesome experience for me, and I'm
grateful to work with awesome folks like him.

{{< center-img src="../../static/supercon_2023_3_3.jpg" alt="supercon-2023-3-3" >}}

> Mike and I in front of the add-on wall.

For now, after experiencing the true wonder of Hackaday
Supercon, I'm off to [RISC-V
Summit](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/riscv-summit/) for even more hardware
goodness. If you'll be there and want to chat, feel free to reach out via one of
the social links on the [homepage](https://danielmangum.com/)!
