+++ 
draft = false
date = 2025-11-09T01:41:34-06:00
title = "Make it Possible, Then Make it Normal"
slug = "possible-then-normal" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

This past Saturday I went out for a 12 mile run with a few friends. Absent the
beautiful fall colors on display this time of year in North Carolina, there was
nothing especially notable about this particular run. However, the fact that it
was not notable is notable itself.

Two years ago I set a goal to run 2,023 miles in 2023. After reaching that goal
with time to spare, I revised the goal to 3,000 miles, and [just barely reached
it](https://danielmangum.com/posts/3000-miles-2023/). Though I have played
sports my entire life, I did not get serious about running until a few years
ago. I would never have believed that I could run anywhere close to 3,000 miles
in just one year, and it took a lot of focus and determination to reach that
goal in 2023.

But I think I am more proud of my run this past Saturday. I didn’t set out to
run 3,000 miles this year, but on November 8th, nearly 2 months earlier than in
2023, I had done it again.

In all aspects of life, it is commendable when someone accomplishes a difficult
or highly improbable feat. However, I have always been more interested in the
cases where someone takes a feat of that nature and makes it so routine, so
expected, that it ceases to be noteworthy. They accomplish it repeatedly, each
time with decreasing fanfare, until it becomes the status quo, where onlookers
are more surprised by its lack of occurrence.

While some people seem to be born with a kind of self-confidence that leads them
never to doubt whether they can accomplish the feat in the first place, for us
mere mortals there is typically a progression from near total disbelief to the
quiet, assured confidence of consistent achievement. For most, and certainly for
me, there is a clear inflection point in the first time that you reach the goal.
While you may gain confidence on the way to it, reaching it eliminates any
reservation about whether it is possible. You know it is, and you are keenly
aware of precisely what it takes to get there, even if it looks a bit different
every time.

Then comes the hard part. With your newfound knowledge of the grit required, you
trade your doubt for dread. You tumble back down the mountain, look up, and see
that it is just as big as the last time you climbed it. Choosing not to make the
journey again is not failure. It does not discount the accomplishment of making
the climb once. However, it does take something new, something different than
the first time you made the journey, not knowing what was to come.

If you do decide to go again, and then again, and again, the size of the
mountain does not change. But eventually, climbing starts to feel like walking
used to, and summiting the mountain is no longer exceptional, it’s just living
life. Reaching that point is what greatness is to me, and I believe that every
person can look at their life and find examples of things they do regularly that
previously would have felt impossible. Next time you are faced with a daunting
climb, reflect on those things.

First you made it possible, then you made it normal.
