+++ 
draft = false
date = 2023-12-19T00:10:34-06:00
title = "Zero to WASI with Clang 17"
slug = "wasm-wasi-clang-17"
+++

I am currently working on a few projects that involve leveraging [WebAssembly
(WASM)](https://webassembly.org/) modules, particularly with [WebAssembly System
Interface (WASI)](https://wasi.dev/) support. While WASI is still in its early
stages, support has already been added to the [Rust
compiler](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/platform-support/wasm32-wasi-preview1-threads.html)
and [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/), as well as runtimes such as
[wasmtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime) and
[WAMR](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasm-micro-runtime). However, getting
an environment setup to compile arbitrary C programs to WASM can still be
challenging.

I recently updated to Clang 17, which was [first released as
`17.0.1`](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/llvm-17-0-1-released/73549) in September of
2023. This release [added
support](https://releases.llvm.org/17.0.1/tools/clang/docs/ReleaseNotes.html#webassembly-support)
for shared libraries and position independent code (PIC) for WASM, but otherwise
had relatively few updates for the target. Installing Clang and the releated
LLVM packages has become rather straightforward with the [automatic installation
script](https://apt.llvm.org/#llvmsh).

```console
$ bash -c "$(wget -O - https://apt.llvm.org/llvm.sh)"
```

> `wget` / `bash` at your own peril!

This will install the latest stable release, which is currently `17.0.6`. If you
wish to install a specific version, you can invoke the script with an argument
as indicated in the documentation.

```console
$ wget https://apt.llvm.org/llvm.sh
$ chmod +x llvm.sh
$ sudo ./llvm.sh <version number>
```

On my Linux machine running Ubuntu 22.04, this installs LLVM in `/usr/lib`.

```
$ /usr/lib/llvm-17/
├── bin
├── build
├── cmake -> lib/cmake/llvm
├── include
├── lib
└── share
```

Clang can be found at `/usr/lib/llvm-17/bin/clang`. We can compile C to WASM
without any further steps if we don't need to perform any I/O. For example, the
following program can be compiled as a WASM module with `two` exposed to the
embedder.

> **Embedder** is the term used in the WASM specification to describe host
> environments in which WASM modules are executed.

`wasm32.c`
```c
int two() {
  return 2;
}
```

```
$ /usr/lib/llvm-17/bin/clang -target wasm32 -nostdlib -Wl,--no-entry -Wl,--export-all  -o wasm32.wasm wasm32.c
```

Because Clang is typically compiling a binary that can be executed from a start
symbol, we need to inform it, or specifically the linker it invokes, that it
should not expect an entrypoint to be defined (`-Wl,--no-entry`). We also need
to inform the linker that it should not attempt to include a standard library,
which we don't have for our WASM target (`-nostdlib`). Lastly, we need to ensure
that our `two()` function is exported so that it can be called by the embedder
(`-Wl,--export-all`). You can find the full set of linker options available for
`wasm-lld` [here](https://lld.llvm.org/WebAssembly.html).

To execute the `two()` function in a host environment, we can use `wasmtime`
with the `--invoke` flag. If you haven't already installed `wasmtime`, you can
do so with the provided script.

```console
curl https://wasmtime.dev/install.sh -sSf | bash
```

Then invoke `two()`.

```console
$ wasmtime run --invoke two wasm32.wasm
2
```

This is interesting, but most meaningful programs need to perform some sort of
I/O. If running in a traditional host environment, such as Linux on my machine,
a C program can perform I/O operations by calling functions from the [C standard
library](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_standard_library). Behind the scenes
these functions are frequently invoking
[syscalls](https://danielmangum.com/posts/risc-v-bytes-privilege-levels/), which
allow a program running in userspace to access privileged resources (e.g.
memory, disk, networking peripherals) via the operating system kernel. The
embedder of our WASM module can be thought of similarly to an operating system;
it has access to privileged resources that the module does not.

However, unlike binary executables compiled for an operating system and
instruction set architecture, WASM modules sacrifice knowledge of a standard
interface for accessing privileged resources in favor of portability. WASM
modules can be run by any embedder when they don't rely on the embedder
_importing_ any functionality. One option for accessing data outside of the WASM
module is to accept arguments to _exported_ functions. We can modify our
previous example to demonstrate this.

`wasm32_args.c`
```c
int add(int a, int b) {
  return a+b;
}
```

We can use the same command to compile this new module as we previously
specified that all symbols should be exported (`-Wl,--no-entry`). 

```
$ /usr/lib/llvm-17/bin/clang -target wasm32 -nostdlib -Wl,--no-entry -Wl,--export-all  -o wasm32_args.wasm wasm32_args.c
```

We can also use `wasmtime` again to invoke the `add()` function, this time
passing the necessary arguments.

```
$ wasmtime run --invoke add wasm32_args.wasm 1 2
3
```

This certainly expands the functionality that can be offered by a WASM module,
and other mechanisms for passing data between the embedder and the module, such
as writing to the module memory, then passing a pointer to the data, can be
utilized in more sophisticated scenarios. However, this pushes much of the logic
to the embedder, meaning that the module remains portable, but more work is
required of consumers. If all embedders could agree on a standard set of
functionality that would be exposed to modules, the modules could maintain
portability, while being able to do almost anything that native binary
executables can. Even more importantly, _existing_ programs could be recompiled
to target the WASM instruction set without having to change any code.

> In reality, there are still frequently small code changes required to target
> WASM.

WASI was
[introduced](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/03/standardizing-wasi-a-webassembly-system-interface/)
to fill this gap. It is similar to [POSIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX),
but as [Lin Clark](https://code-cartoons.com/) describes:

> POSIX provides source code portability. You can compile the same source code
> with different versions of libc to target different machines. But WebAssembly
> needs to go one step beyond this. We need to be able to compile once and run
> across a whole bunch of different machines. We need portable binaries.

Because of this binary portability, only one libc implementation is necessary,
namely [`wasi-libc`](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-libc). In order to
utilize the functionality it offers in our WASM modules, we need to build a
[`sysroot`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/CrossCompilation.html#toolchain-options)
that can be linked against when compiling a module. This can be accomplished by
cloning the repository, then running `make` with our Clang 17 installation.

> If you are just interested in getting things working and don't care to use
> your existing Clang / LLVM installation, you can download pre-compiled
> binaries from the [`wasi-sdk`](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-sdk)
> repository. In fact, a [new release for LLVM
> 17](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-sdk/releases/tag/wasi-sdk-21) was
> published while I was writing this post.

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-libc.git && cd wasi-libc
$ make CC=/usr/lib/llvm-17/bin/clang
```

This should produce a `sysroot` directory, which contains the necessary header
files and libraries, as denoted in the output.

```
#
# The build succeeded! The generated sysroot is in /home/hasheddan/code/github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-libc/sysroot.
#
```

We can inform Clang of the `sysroot` location using the `--sysroot` flag. By
default, Clang will attempt to also link the [LLVM `compiler-rt`
`builtins`](https://compiler-rt.llvm.org/) library. LLVM packages do not
currently include the WASM build of the library
(`libclang_rt.builtins-wasm32.a`), so we must either build it ourselves, or
download the pre-compiled binary from the [`wasi-sdk`
release](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-sdk/releases/tag/wasi-sdk-20).
Or... we could use some magic incantations with Clang to avoid attempting to
link it for our simple example. First let's define a program that utilizes I/O.

`wasm32_wasi.c`
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <errno.h>

int main() {
  FILE *fp;
  fp = fopen("hello.txt", "w");
  if (fp == NULL) {
    fprintf(stderr, "error opening file: %s\n", strerror(errno));
    exit(1);
  }

  fputs("Hello, world!\n", fp);
  fclose(fp);
  return 0;
}
```

All we are doing is opening a file and writing `Hello, world!` to it, but we are
making use of several libc functions to do so. To compile this program to a WASM
module with WASI support, we can use the following command.

```
$ /usr/lib/llvm-17/bin/clang -target wasm32-wasi --sysroot=/home/hasheddan/code/github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-libc/sysroot -nodefaultlibs -lc -o wasm32_wasi.wasm wasm32_wasi.c
```

There are a few notable differences from our previous invocations, including:

- The `-target` is now specified as `wasm32-wasi` to indicate that we need WASI
  support.
- We have provided a path to our `sysroot` that we built with `wasi-libc`.
- We have added the `-nodefaultlibs` flag to prevent the linker from attempting
  to link `libclang_rt.builtins-wasm32.a`, then provided `-lc` to re-add linking
  libc.
- We have removed `-nostdlib`, `-Wl,--no-entry`, and `-Wl,--export-all` as we do
  want to use the standard library (libc), we do have a defined entrypoint, and
  we don't need to export all symbols (`_start` will be exported automatically).

Finally, we can use `wasmtime` to run our WASM WASI module, this time without
specifying a function to invoke.

```
$ wasmtime run wasm32_wasi.wasm
error opening file: No such file or directory
```

The error here is due to [WASI capabilities
model](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/blob/main/docs/WASI-capabilities.md),
specifically related to [filesystem
rules](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/blob/main/docs/WASI-capabilities.md#filesystem-rules),
which differ from permissions in a POSIX environment.

> One difference though is that POSIX normally allows processes to request a
> file descriptor for any file in the entire filesystem hierarchy, which is
> granted based on whatever security policies are in place. This doesn't violate
> the capability model, but it doesn't take full advantage of it. CloudABI,
> Fuchsia, and other capability-oriented systems prefer to take advantage of the
> hierarchical nature of the filesystem and require untrusted code to have a
> capability for a directory in order to access things inside that directory.
> This way, you can launch untrusted code, and at runtime give it access to
> specific directories, without having to set permissions in the filesystem or
> in per-application or per-user configuration settings.

In order for our program to create a file in the current directory, we need to
give it access to the current directory.

```
$ wasmtime run --dir=. wasm32_wasi.wasm
$ cat hello.txt
Hello, world!
```

By exposing libc functions to our module, and granting it capabilities to access
resources outside of its environment, we are now able to write programs that
look much more like the native binaries we are used to. That's enough to get us
started, but check back for more posts as I continue diving deeper into the
current state of WASM / WASI.
