+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-02-10T17:33:50-06:00
title = "Deploying a MySQL RDS Instance on AWS Using Crossplane"
slug = "mysql-on-aws-using-crossplane" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

Crossplane is a new project from [Upbound]() that uses the Kubernetes API to control the lifecycle of cloud provider managed services. For those who are not familiar with Kubernetes, and especially those who are not familiar with extending the platform, the way Crossplane works can be somewhat confusing.

I won't go into extreme depth for the sake of brevity, but essentially one of the biggest selling points of Kubernetes is that it babysits your application. What I mean by that is that if any of your containerized services goes down, or you just deployed one for the first time, Kubernetes takes care of making sure it starts and keeps running. It does this through lifecycle management. You don't have to know exactly how it works to use it, but behind the scenes it is following your intstructions to deploy the service, then it periodically checks in on it to make sure it is staying in line with the rules you laid out for it. If you have ever worked as a systems administrator you can immediately see the value in this, hence the extremely quick rise in popularity of the platform.

While Kubernetes provides a lot of value by abstracting general compute resources, it fails to take advantage of the abstraction afforded by using cloud provider managed services. This is where Crossplane comes in.

## Provisioning Managed Services

The best way to understand how Crossplane works is to actually deploy a resource.