+++ 
draft = false
date = 2019-02-23T14:27:08-06:00
title = "Understanding Mocking in Golang with a Real Example"
slug = "understanding-mocking-in-golang-real-example" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

*Disclaimer: The purpose of this post is to demonstrate how to do effective mocking in Golang, but as I wrote it I felt the need to include many other concepts (modular code, testing, object-oriented programming, project directory structure, etc.) before finally landing on mocking. In a way, I feel like this makes sense because mocking is only possible in Golang if you have been careful to write your code in a "mockable" way. Or maybe I am just a lousy rambling writer. I'll let you be the judge.*

Most people are familiar with the concept of **Unit Testing**, but I have found that **Integration Testing** can be a little harder to interpret. For the purpose of this article, we will work from the following simple definition of an integration test:

> The practice of testing interactions between a service and any other services it depends on.

The best way to understand what this means is by creating an example. We will be using a simple REST API server the connects to a database as our example service. Before we get started, it is important to introduce the concept of **Mocks**. As mentioned previously, we want to see how our service interacts with dependencies, but sometimes the dependencies don't exist yet or are not suitable to be used for testing. A mock is simply a representation of a dependency that interacts with other services in the same manner, but doesn't actually perform all of the same tasks behind the scenes. For example, our mock database may allow a service to establish a "connection" and run queries, but will actually just return data from static CSV files. Without any further ado, let's go ahead and get started!

*Note: Each section will have a link that references the commit that represents that state the repository will be in at the end of that section.*

# A First Pass at the API Service
[Commit Link - Section 1](https://github.com/HashedDan/gowebserver/tree/62cc218461ac9839b870076db3888b1914e9f36c)

Golang makes it very easy to build an http server quickly with its `net/http` package.

Let's start out with the simplest implementation:

```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"net/http"
)

func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	fmt.Fprintf(w, "This is an API endpoint.")
}

func main() {
	http.HandleFunc("/", handler)
	log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
}
```

If you run this process, it will simply listen for requests on port 8080 and respond with "This is an API endpoint.".

This is great for a small API, but it is not very reusable. Let's look at a more modular approach.

# A Reusable API Service
[Commit Link - Section 2] (https://github.com/HashedDan/gowebserver/tree/3e2d564890c1ab142c427e81db152386eb691918)

The first thing we will do is setup our basic directory structure. When building any Go program, I usually adhere to some adaptation of the [Golang Standards project layout](https://github.com/golang-standards/project-layout). Therefore, we will layout our directory structure as follows:

```
gowebserver/
│   README.md   
│
└───cmd/
│   │
│   └───gowebserver/
│       │   main.go
│   
└───pkg
│   │
│   └───srv/
│       │   srv.go
```
The cmd/ directory will be our entry point for the program, and the pkg/ directory will contain all packages we build to accomplish our goals (just the basic service at first). This structure is indicative of how we want to think about writing modular code. The service, and any other packages we build are meant to be used by the process. Packages should be self-contained items that come with their own API to be used. This concecpt is somewhat similar to object-oriented programming, although there is much (needless) debate about whether [Go is in fact an object-oriented language](https://flaviocopes.com/golang-is-go-object-oriented/).

Let's begin by defining our base service (`Srv`). It will be a basic wrapper around the standard library's http server, but we will also add a property to enable / disable logging. Our code will be in `pkg/srv/srv.go`:
```
type Srv struct {
	logging bool
	server     http.Server
}
```
Next we will implement the methods that we require for our service. While Golang does not support inheritance, it does allow structs to automatically implement interfaces if the struct implements all of the methods defined in the interface. We will define the methods we want our service struct to implement in the Server interface.
```
// Service defines the methods the service must implement
type Service interface {
	Start() error
	Stop() error
	Handle() error
}
```
Before we implement these methods, we need to define a way to create a server.
```
// CreateService returns a pointer to a new service instance
func CreateService(address string, log bool) (*Srv, error) {
	httpServ := &http.Server{
		Addr: address,
	}

	return &Srv{
		logging: log,
		server:  httpServ,
	}, nil
}
```
Now to define the methods...
```
// Start causes the http server to begin listening for connection
func (s *Srv) Start() error {
	fmt.Printf("Starting server on port %s.\n", s.server.Addr)
	return s.server.ListenAndServe()
}

// Stop closes all connections and shuts down the http server
func (s *Srv) Stop() error {
	fmt.Printf("Shutting down server running on port %s.\n", s.server.Addr)
	return s.server.Shutdown(context.Background())
}

// Handle causes the http server to begin listening for connection
func (s *Srv) Handle(pattern string, handler func(http.ResponseWriter, *http.Request)) error {
	if s.logging {
		fmt.Printf("Adding new server endpoint at %s.\n", pattern)
		http.HandleFunc(pattern, logger(pattern, handler))
		return nil
	}
	http.HandleFunc(pattern, handler)
	return nil
}
```
As you can see, we have essentially just wrapped the funcionality of the `net/http` server package into the `Srv` struct. However, if you look at the `Handle()` method, you will see we have wrapped the handle function in a `logger()` function if logging is enabled. The `logger()` function is http middleware, performing some action, then executing the provided handler function.
```
func logger(pattern string, next http.HandlerFunc) http.HandlerFunc {
	return func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		log.Printf("Endpoint connection at %s from %s", pattern, r.RemoteAddr)
		next.ServeHTTP(w, r)
	}
}
```
Now that we have completed the definition and implementation of `Srv`, we have to use it! In `cmd/gowebserver/main.go`, we will create an instance of `Srv`, add an endpoint handler, then start the http server.
```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"net/http"

	"github.com/hasheddan/gowebserver/pkg/srv"
)

func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	fmt.Fprintf(w, "This is an API endpoint.")
}

func main() {
	s, err := srv.CreateService(":8080", true)

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Failure to create service.")
	}

	s.Handle("/test", handler)

	log.Fatal(s.Start())
}
```

## Adding Functionality to Our Service

Now we want to add further functionality to our service.