+++ 
draft = false
date = 2022-02-07T00:10:34-06:00
title = "The Missing Kubernetes Type System"
slug = "the-missing-kubernetes-type-system" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

Sometimes I hear folks in the [Crossplane](https://crossplane.io/) community ask
if they can just use [Helm](https://helm.sh/) instead of opting into [our
package manager](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.6/concepts/packages.html). The
technical answer to this question is "yes", but it typically represents a
misinterpretation of what Crossplane is providing in a
[Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) cluster. That being said, I completely
understand why someone would ask this question, and quite frankly, I think the
confusion is our fault. In Crossplane and across the Kubernetes community we
lean in heavily to the idea that everything is "just an object". While this is
true in some respects, it has led us to providing a weak separation between
operations that are _defining the cluster_ and those that are _consuming the
cluster_. Unsurprisingly, this is not the first time in the history of computing
that a system has skewed towards flexibility. In fact, the basic task of
programming a computer has slowly migrated from extremely flexible assembly
instructions, to languages with high levels of abstraction and constraints.
While low-level access to a machine is still necessary in some cases, the vast
majority of code that is written today is better off interfacing with the
hardware through a level of abstraction that offers protection, whether via a
runtime or the compiler. These abstractions are presented in the form of a type
system. 

## What is a Type System?

I don't know how to tell you this, but types aren't real. Well, maybe a less
controversial way to say that is that types are _artificial_. That is, they are
a self-imposed limitation that we are layering on the fundamental constraints of
a system. The complexities of deciding what limitations we place and how strict
they are is the reason that we continue to build new programming languages
despite the constraints of the underlying hardware changing at a much slower
pace.

The typical programming language offers a set of **built-in** types. These may
be _primitive types_, which represent simple numeric and logical values, such as
an `integer` or `boolean`, or _composite types_, which express logic at a higher
level, such as an `array`. Many languages also support **user-defined** types,
which offer a way to _define your own types_ using the built-in types. For
example, [Go](https://go.dev/) allows you to create your own primitive types
that add custom functionality, such as attaching methods to an `int`, as well as
your own composite types by defining members and methods on a `struct`.

```go

type CoolInteger int

func (c CoolInteger) Print(w io.Writer) {
	fmt.Fprintf(w, "Cool Integer: %d", c)
}

type CoolType struct {
	some  int
	built string
	in    bool
	types []float32
}

```

When you define your own types, you are building on the constraints of the
built-in types to be able to safely express higher-level concepts. Almost all
"modern" programming languages also support _abstract types_. An abstract type
is one that is defined by its _behavior_ rather than its _implementation_. Once
again, a built-in type, such as an `interface`, allows us to define these for
ourselves.

```go

type CoolAbstractType interface {
	This()
	Is() error
	My() int
	Behavior() string
}

```

There are many other classifications of types, such as algebraic data types,
references, functions, and more, but today we are going to focus in on
primitive, composite, and abstract types. When we write a program with any
complexity, we typically are doing a mix of _defining_ types and _using_ them.
Depending on the language, these may be closely related or entirely disjoint
activities.

> Somewhere a programming language theory graduate student is screaming at me.

### A Note on Safety

In the preceding section I used the term "safely" to describe how we implement
higher-level logic. The degree of safety we get from a language is highly
dependant on the type system. Safety guarantees are propagated from built-in
types to the user-defined types constructed on top of them. For instance, a
language like [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) (ignoring `unsafe` code for a
moment) does not allow for simultaneous mutable ownership of the same data,
while a language like C gives the programmer unfettered access to the machine's
resources. The machine is offering the same capabilities to both of these
languages, but Rust is giving us a layer of abstraction that prevents us from
using the machine in some "unsafe" ways. However, importantly, the concept of
safety that Rust gives us has to be implemented by Rust itself, and the code
that turns an "unsafe system" (the machine) into a "safe system" (the Rust
compiler) is inherently doing some unsafe things.

{{< center-img src="../../static/k8s-type-system-0.png" alt="rust-ecosystem-safety" 
>}}

This would seem problematic: the system that is enforcing our safety guarantees
is itself not safe. On the other hand, _something_ must implement the safety, so
what Rust programmers are collectively saying is: "let's shrink the amount of
unsafe operations we need to do down to the bare necessities, standardize them
in a single system, and test that system rigorously". **If we have confidence in
the correctness of that small system, arbitrarily large systems can be built on
top of it**. This is the same premise behind hardware [privilege
levels](https://danielmangum.com/posts/risc-v-bytes-privilege-levels/) and the
operating systems that utilize them.

## The Kubernetes Type System

Kubernetes allows you to add new types (`kind` in Kubernetes parlance) by
[creating a `CustomResourceDefinition`
(CRD)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/).
When we add a new CRD to a Kubernetes cluster, we may, at first glance, view the
operation as analogous to adding a new user-defined type. We are using a
built-in primitive to define something that we can then create instances of.
From this perspective, it makes sense why we might use the same tool, whether it
be Helm, [Kustomize](https://kustomize.io/), or plain old `kubectl apply`, to
manage our type definitions and instances. If we are drawing a comparison to
programs we write, we are defining our `struct` and creating instances of it in
the same place.

However, when we define a new type in Kubernetes, we typically also want to add
some associated behavior. This takes the form of a
[controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/),
which essentially performs some computation in response to the creation, update,
or deletion of instances of the type defined by our CRD. Kubernetes itself
places no limits on this computation, and while there are
[many](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime)
[frameworks](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-runtime) for writing
idiomatic controllers, there is no check to say "you probably don't want to do
that". If Kubernetes is the machine we are programming, writing controllers is
like writing C.

If you are only using Kubernetes to run ephemeral containerized workloads and
your controllers are performing non-critical tasks, this might not be too scary
for you. Odds are this is not the case though, as Kubernetes has grown far
beyond a container orchestration platform, even to the point that projects like
[kcp](https://github.com/kcp-dev/kcp) (among others) are working to make it easy
to use Kubernetes without many of the built-in APIs. And this gets to crux of
the issue: **we view adding CRDs and controllers to a cluster as adding
_user-defined types_, when in reality it is much more akin to adding _built-in
types_**. Another way to say it is that adding CRDs and controllers is like
expanding that small bit of unsafe code in the Rust ecosystem. We don't expect
every developer to write their own compiler, why are we expecting every DevOps
engineer (whatever the flavor of the month definition of that role is) to write
controllers? It's not that folks aren't capable, it's that it is not an
efficient use of time and resources.

{{< center-img src="../../static/k8s-type-system-1.png"
alt="kubernetes-bag-of-types" 
>}}

> This "big bag of objects" in a cluster includes many instances of Kubernetes
> native built-in types (e.g. `Pod`, `Service`), a few custom built-in types
> (e.g. `CustomResourceDefinition` + `Deployment`), and a few instances of those
> custom built-in types (e.g. `MyType`), but we have no concept of user-defined
> types.

So is the answer for an organization to only use vendor-backed or reputable open
source controllers to extend Kubernetes? I don't think that is a realistic
scenario. Organizations are complex and if they want to go "all in" on the
Kubernetes API, which is [quickly becoming a POSIX-like
interface](https://twitter.com/d_feldman/status/1489755902861324288?s=20&t=Hc1_JAemEyXQviQKneIsZQ)
(i.e. ubiquitous), they are going to eventually find themselves needing to add
some custom functionality. What may be surprising to some organizations is that,
even if you are small, that day will likely come sooner than you expect. So
we've found ourselves at an impasse: we need custom functionality, but the
overhead (dare I say "danger") of writing and maintaining our controllers is too
great.

## Do Namespaces Address This?

[Namespaces](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/)
are primarily used in Kubernetes for categorization and isolation via
[role-based access control
(RBAC)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/). Many
types are namespace-scoped (e.g. `Pod`, `Service`, `Deployment`), meaning that
their instances must be associated with a single namespace, while others are
cluster-scoped (e.g. `CustomResourceDefinition`, `ClusterRole`,
`PersistentVolume`). Namespaces are not critical to the concepts we are talking
about today, but the "big bag of objects" diagram in the preceding section is
bound to make someone upset, and it is worth distinguishing what namespaces give
us vs. what a type system gives us. Fortunately, most programming languages are
[namespaced as
well](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namespace#In_programming_languages), and
this gives us a nice parallel. Namespaces are a wonderful way of grouping types
and preventing library consumers from accessing things they shouldn't (e.g. by
using private identifiers), but they are a way to organize a program, not build
a compiler. In other words, they are for providing protections around
_user-defined types_.

Namespaces are a useful tool, but only if the type system they are built on is
already sound. Unfortunately, as we covered in the previous section, our CRDs
and controllers are expanding our type system, not building on top of it, so
namespaces aren't going to help us much.

> An important attribute of CRDs is that they allow you to define cluster-scoped
> or namespace-scoped types (or both if you are using Crossplane). Namespaces
> are an important part of the type system we want to build, they just aren't
> building it for us.

## A Model for User-Defined Types

If you ask anyone who is moderately familiar with Crossplane what its value
proposition is they won't miss a beat: provisioning cloud infrastructure using
the Kubernetes API. We even say so [on the front page](https://crossplane.io/).
However, if you dig a bit deeper, you'll find that all of the components of the
core system actually have nothing to do with cloud infrastructure specifically.
The Crossplane community often talks about building "control planes", which can
be thought of as Kubernetes clusters plus additional APIs. **Your control plane
is your distributed systems programming language, Crossplane is your compiler**.

How does this work? Since I started this post talking about Crossplane packages,
let's begin there. Crossplane offers two types of packages:
[Providers](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.6/concepts/packages.html#provider-packages)
and
[Configurations](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.6/concepts/packages.html#configuration-packages).
These map quite nicely to our _built-in types_ and _user-defined types_.
Providers are just CRDs and their controllers packaged up into an [OCI
image](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec). They look like other
Kubernetes add-ons you see in the wild, with the difference being that they are
installed via the Crossplane package manager, which provides additional
guarantees, such as preventing multiple Providers from acting on the same types.

> Exclusive ownership of mutable data? That sounds like [something we talked
> about
> earlier](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-01-what-is-ownership.html#ownership-rules)!

Providers supply the _built-in types_ of your distributed systems programming
language. Like the Rust compiler, subject matter experts who dedicate their time
and energy to making behavior correct build these (more on this in a bit), which
allows everyone else to build on top of them safely.

Configurations supply _user-defined_ types. This works through a Crossplane
feature called
[composition](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.6/reference/composition.html), which
is controlled by the `CompositeResourceDefinition` (XRD) (though very closely
related, this is not the same thing as a CRD) and `Composition` types. XRDs are
how we define _abstract types_, while `Composition`s are how we define
_composite types_. Just like the parallel concepts in programming languages,
there can be many `Composition`s that satisfy the interface defined by a given
XRD, bringing
[polymorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)) to
your control plane APIs. A single `Composition` is selected at "run time" (i.e.
when a user creates an instance of the type defined by an XRD) based on
attributes of the environment, essentially employing the same techniques as
[dynamic dispatch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_dispatch). A
`Composition` embeds one or more resources that Crossplane's composition engine
renders based on the specification of the `Composition` and the values passed in
the instance of the type defined by the XRD. The embedded resources may be
instances of types provided by installed Provider packages (i.e. _built-in
types_) or may be types defined by other XRDs (i.e. other _user-defined types_).
This allows for powerful stacking of user-defined types to create higher-level
abstractions.

{{< center-img src="../../static/k8s-type-system-2.png"
alt="built-in-and-user-defined" 
>}}

> Not pictured: Kubernetes native built-in type implementations (i.e. the API
> server), which exist at the same level as Providers. 

A programming language's type system gives you a way to safely define your
program. In Kubernetes, your program is an application packaged up into
something like a Helm chart or a [Carvel](https://carvel.dev/) package.
Crossplane gives you a way to build the type system that governs it.

> If you want to learn more about how all of these mechanisms work under the
> hood, I wrote about packages
> [here](https://danielmangum.com/posts/infrastructure-in-your-software-packages/)
> and composition
> [here](https://danielmangum.com/posts/crossplane-infrastructure-llvm/).

### Flexibility in the Compiler

One of the first things we said about programming languages in this post is that
we keep making new ones. A key attribute of successful languages is a fierce
dedication to a set of values, while still providing escape hatches for
exceptional use-cases (e.g. `unsafe` blocks in Rust). Sometimes I am a little
brash, but I'm not brash enough to sit here and say that Crossplane has
implemented the one true mechanism for defining types in Kubernetes. Though I
called Crossplane a compiler, it's more like a compiler framework (see [Is
Crossplane the Infrastructure
LLVM?](https://danielmangum.com/posts/crossplane-infrastructure-llvm/)).

> A more apt term than "compiler framework" for describing what Crossplane does
> could be "type system manager".

We know at this point that CRDs and controllers (i.e. Providers) are
terrifyingly flexible, so we are mostly unconstrained with our _built-in types_.
Fortunately, composition (i.e. the engine that turns instances of _user-defined
types_ into a set of _built-in types_) will also [soon be
pluggable](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/2524). This means
that the way you define relationships between your abstract types and your
composite types can be expanded to cover additional use-cases. The point is that
Crossplane is giving you the tools to build a type system, with some solid
defaults, but it isn't forcing one on you. **What we _would_ like to do is force
using _some_ type system**.

## Who Writes the Controllers?

To re-emphasize my earlier point, writing controllers is not about some skill
level that one group has and another does not. Rather, it is simply about who
has the time and resources to invest in writing them well, creating that smaller
bit of trusted unsafe code that allows us to safely build arbitrarily large
abstractions on top. Today this looks like subject matter experts in various
fields. For instance, the folks working on
[cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) know a lot about managing TLS
certificates and the folks working on [Knative](https://knative.dev/docs/) know
a lot about serverless compute. In the Crossplane community, we do a lot of work
on writing CRDs and controllers (Providers) for cloud providers, and well,
really any APIs folks want to access via Kubernetes. Along the way we put effort
into standardizing common access patterns and functionality so that other folks
with the time and energy can come along and build missing Providers.

However, ultimately the folks who know the API being targeted the best should be
owning the development of its Provider. They have the most context and
expertise, and they can ensure that trusted code that supplies built-in types
for customers' control planes offers the level of safety they need to build
their user-defined types on top. The Crossplane community does a great job of
writing Providers (in my _extremely_ biased opinion), but if I am AWS, GCP,
Microsoft, etc. I want to be owning my Provider. Not only that, I want to be
building reference architectures in Configuration packages that help my
customers compose their platforms safely. **Expressive type systems allow for
implementations to easily be switched out at each layer of abstraction. When
users have this power, I want my implementation to be the best.**

## Final Thoughts

I hope the takeaway from this post is not that Crossplane solves all of your
problems, but rather an acknowledgement that the language we use for programming
our distributed systems is lacking key features -- features that we have
collectively deemed useful in the context of writing software. We know that
these features can be implemented in many different ways, and walking the line
between adhering to a set of values and offering needed flexibility is hard. If
we are going to do this right, we need everyone's voice in the room. Come join
us.