+++ 
draft = true
date = 2021-04-18T01:41:34-06:00
title = "chdir to cwd: permission denied"
slug = "runc-chdir-to-cwd" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

_This post describes a [breaking
change](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/commit/d869d05aba0fc2519060b3b20b679ac5a5068e78)
in [runc
v1.0.0-rc93](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/releases/tag/v1.0.0-rc93),
that has subsequently had a [workaround
implemented](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/pull/2894) that will
presumably be included in
[v1.0.0-rc94](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/milestone/11). Thanks to
[@haircommander](https://twitter.com/haircommander) for talking through the
issue with me and implementing the subsequent workaround, and to
[@mattomata](https://twitter.com/mattomata) for his consultation on the
[`distroless/static:nonroot`
behavior](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless). If you are not
interested in the background of the issue, you can skip reading this post and
take a look at my detailed testing scenarios on the [Crossplane
repo](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2245), or my breakdown of
the conflict with the `nonroot` image on the [distroless
repo](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless/issues/718)._

Recently, a [Crossplane](https://crossplane.io/) user reported that they had
upgraded to the latest version of [Openshift](https://www.openshift.com/) and
their `Pods` started immediately [going into
`CrashLoopBackoff`](https://sysdig.com/blog/debug-kubernetes-crashloopbackoff/).
They went back and verified that the same version of Crossplane was running
successfully on the older Openshift version, but now the containers were exiting
with:

```
level=error msg="container_linux.go:366: starting container process caused: chdir to cwd (\"/home/nonroot\") set in config.json failed: permission denied"
```

Fortunately, though this error is quite verbose for someone who is not familiar
with container runtime internals, it is extremely helpful for a developer as it
provides the file name, line number, and explicit expression of the action that
caused the error. Most [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) platforms these days
use [_containerd_](https://containerd.io/) as their "high-level" container
runtime, and [_runc_](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc) as their
"low-level" container runtime. I won't go into too much detail on the
responsibilities of each (I recommend you check out this [blog
series](https://www.ianlewis.org/en/container-runtimes-part-1-introduction-container-r)
by [Ian Lewis](https://www.ianlewis.org/)), but an extremely simple explanation
is that _containerd_ orchestrates containers whose lifecycle is managed by
_runc_. This error has to do with actually starting the container, which is a
dead giveaway that we are dealing with _runc_, but if you weren't sure it could
be confirmed by looking at the source of
[container_linux.go](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/blob/master/libcontainer/container_linux.go).

A container is essentially just a [Linux
process](https://tldp.org/LDP/tlk/kernel/processes.html) that is sandboxed using
[namespaces](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/namespaces.7.html) and
[cgroups](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/cgroups.7.html). This means that
they have the same properties that any other process has, including state,
various identifiers, scheduling criteria, and more (if you want to learn more
about all of the attributes of a process, taking a look at the
[task_struct](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/c98ff1d013d2d53911c4b3e8ba14c7cd141cf1ed/include/linux/sched.h#L649)
in the Linux Kernel source is a great adventure). The [OCI Image
Specification](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec) allows you to
define some of these properties, which are then enforced by the container
runtime, in this case _runc_.

Unfortunately (or fortunately, depending on how you look at it), these
attributes can be defined at various levels of the container orchestration
stack, notably build time and run time. For example, in a
[Dockerfile](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) you can define a
[`USER`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#user),
[`WORKDIR`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#workdir), and
[`ENTRYPOINT`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#entrypoint),
but you can also [override
them](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/#overriding-dockerfile-image-defaults)
when running a container using the image you built. Similarly, Kubernetes
exposes some of these attributes in the `Pod` specification through [fields such
as](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/)
`runAsUser`, `runAsGroup`, and `workingDir`. This allows for maximum
flexibility, but also can lead to a rocky user experience when building widely
distributed images or running 3rd party images in your cluster.

So back to the original issue: the parameters used to run the Crossplane
containerized processes had not been changed, but _runc_ was now failing to
start them. Once again looking at the error message, we can see that _runc_ is
unable to `chdir` to the `cwd` (or `WORKDIR` in `Dockerfile` parlance). When a
container is started, _runc_ must identify the `cwd` that is specified in the
image manifest, or overridden by the container orchestrator, and switch to that
directory before actually starting the process. Since this step was now failing,
there must have been a change in how _runc_ executes it.

Taking a look at [this issue in the Red Hat bug
tracker](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1934177), we can see that a
[recent
change](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/commit/d869d05aba0fc2519060b3b20b679ac5a5068e78)
in _runc_ switched from executing the `chdir` step with the `UID` of _runc_ to
the `UID` specified by the container image (or overridden by the container
orchestrator). But why was this change primarily causing problems for images
built on the `distroless/static:nonroot` [base
image](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless)? To understand, we
must first take a look at how the base image is built.

The purpose of the distroless project is to provide base images that have the
minimum components required for an application to run. Many common base images,
such as [alpine](https://hub.docker.com/_/alpine), are stripped of much of the
cruft of a full Linux distribution, but there are still many tools and utilities
that are unneeded and expose unnecessary attack vectors if a container was
compromised. So distroless just packages the [bare
essentials](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless/blob/main/base/README.md#image-contents),
which for a Go application are packages such as `ca-certificates` and `tzdata`.
The distroless project also offers a `nonroot` variant of this bare bones image,
which is essentially the same as `static`, but [sets the
user](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless/blob/2e539660094d9c2910f6134df1d0d3919479c393/base/base.bzl#L19)
to `nonroot` (UID = `65532`), and the working directory to `/home/nonroot`.

> Note: these images are built with [Bazel](https://bazel.build/), but you can
> get a good idea of how the `.bzl` files map to a `Dockerfile` without
> requiring a deep understanding of the build system just by looking at the
> [docker rules](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_docker).

The `/home/nonroot` directory gets created with `0700` permissions, which
[means](http://www.filepermissions.com/file-permission/0700) that the owning
user (`nonroot`) has `Read`, `Write`, and `Execute` permissions on the
directory, but other users, even those in the same group, have _no permissions_.
In order to `chdir`, the calling process must have `Execute` permissions on the
target directory. In this case only UID `65532` has those permissions, but the
`nonroot` image sets the user for us so that shouldn't be an issue right?

As mentioned before, the build time properties are sometimes overridden at run
time, and on Openshift, this [_always_
happens](https://www.openshift.com/blog/a-guide-to-openshift-and-uids) unless
explicitly overridden. When a `Namespace` is created on an Openshift cluster, it
is given a range of UIDs and GIDs, and each `Pod` that gets deployed in the
`Namespace` is assigned the first UID and GID in the range. However, this is not
new functionality in Openshift, so if the `65532` UID was already being
overridden in older versions, why were the containers able to be started
successfully?

The reason lies in the fact that the newer version of Openshift had upgraded to
_runc_ `v1.0.0-rc93` which included the aforementioned change to `chdir` with
the container user rather than the user for the _runc_ process itself. Unless
running in [rootless
mode](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc#rootless-containers), _runc_ runs
as the `root` user, which typically has special privileged
[capabilities](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/capabilities.7.html), such
as `CAP_FOWNER`, which allow it bypass permissions. So though the older
Openshift version was still using a "random" UID, since the underlying _runc_
version was executing `chdir` as root, it was not resulting in a permission
denied error.

Whether this change is a feature or a bug is mostly a matter of how one
interprets the responsibilities of a container runtime. However, regardless of
it being "correct" or not, it was a breaking change to a rather important
component of the container ecosystem, which has led to a [subsequent
workaround](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/pull/2894) being introduced
that will presumably be included in
[v1.0.0-rc94](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/milestone/11). As for
current users of the `nonroot` base image, though I have detailed the situation
in an [issue on the distroless
repo](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless/issues/718), I would
not expect (nor recommend) that a change be made to the image configuration. The
purpose of the image is to enforce the use of the single `nonroot` user, so
making it possible not to breaks the original intention. Instead, if you agree
with Red Hat's
[assertion](https://www.openshift.com/blog/a-guide-to-openshift-and-uids) (see
the "Traditional Applications and UIDs" section) that an application should not
"expect a specific UID under which they will be running", a viable alternative
is to use the plain `distroless/static` image and manually set UID = `65532` in
your image build, effectively saying that "you will run as `nonroot` by default,
but you are free to override if you know what you're doing". This is the
[direction we have gone](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2245) in
the [most recent Crossplane
release](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/releases/tag/v1.1.1).

## Closing Thoughts

Hopefully this post serves as a helpful guide for other folks that encounter
this issue. I want to give a huge shout out to all the folks who work on
projects like _runc_ and _containerd_, which are the foundation for much of the
infrastructure of the cloud native landscape. When there are changes that break
existing behavior I encourage folks to respond with grace and constructive
feedback. Often times, as is true with this change, the new behavior is in the
interest of protecting users, even if it can cause short term headaches.

Send me a message [@hasheddan](https://twitter.com/hasheddan) on Twitter for any
questions or comments!
