+++ 
draft = false
date = 2023-04-06T00:10:34-06:00
title = "Do you want to take a leap of faith?"
slug = "leap-of-faith"
tags = []
+++

Upbound reached [General
Availability](https://blog.upbound.io/upbound-general-availability/) on Tuesday
and **today is my last day at the company**. It feels surreal to write that,
despite knowing this day was coming for quite some time. With my time coming to
a close, I wanted to take a moment to reflect on one of the most wonderful and
impactful experiences of my life.[^1]

## Joining Upbound

Inception is one of my favorite movies.[^2] I’ve always loved [the
scene](https://youtu.be/BiST1mat4go), and the subsequent callback to it, where
Cobb is deciding whether to accept Saito’s proposal.

> COBB: If I were to do it. If I could do it... how do I know you can deliver?

> SAITO: You don't. But I can. So do you want to take a leap of faith, or become
> an old man, filled with regret, waiting to die alone?

One of the many things I’ve learned through the ups and downs of life in a
startup is that the ability to make correct decisions at an above average rate
is perhaps the most impactful attribute of a leader. We’ll avoid making any
judgments about Cobb’s leadership qualities, or Saito’s ethics for that matter,
but one thing we can take from this exchange is that, in a few sentences, a
decision transforms from looking quite ill-advised to potentially a no-brainer.

How does this happen? It’s all about Saito’s framing. Highly compelling leaders
are great at framing. It’s how they can convince a group of people to invest a
lot of time and effort into something that has a low statistical probability of
success. This is fairly well understood. What is somewhat more subtle is that
great leaders also must be able to navigate other’s framing. In this situation,
Saito is using a negative alternative to compel Cobb to do what he wants.
However, the alternative is not a threat, it is a legitimate negative outcome of
making the decision to not accept the deal, and Cobb knows it. Ultimately,
standing on the tarmac considering the possibility of seeing his childrens’
faces again, he takes the deal. Most of the decisions we make in life are
presented through some framing.[^3]

In my final year of college, I was sitting at the kitchen table in the
off-campus apartment I shared with a few friends reading through the news from a
conference I had stumbled upon[^4]. A new startup had launched, touting an [open
source project that would "open up the
cloud."](https://blog.upbound.io/introducing-crossplane-open-source-multicloud-control-plane/)
That startup was Upbound, and the open source project was Crossplane. I had
worked for a few companies throughout college, both full time and as an intern,
and I seemed to gravitate towards infrastructure automation. I remember it was
around this time that I started using the motto "I like writing code that writes
code.[^5]"

I was also attracted to Crossplane because of its proximity to Kubernetes, which
was starting to reach the point where it could be considered a "sure thing." So
I did what any developer in my shoes would do: opened a [pull
request](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/292) with a docs
update.[^6] I love that I can link to this as an artifact, not because I added
something to the project, but because you can see Jared’s positive feedback and
welcoming spirit, which I have had the privilege of experiencing every day
since. [Jared](https://github.com/jbw976) is truly one of the kindest folks that
I have ever met, and much of the success of Crossplane and the community can be
attributed to his leadership.

That positive feedback was enough to keep me contributing on nights and weekends
as I graduated early from school, started a full time job, and got engaged(!).
As I continued contributing, I started to build a relationship with Jared,
[Illya](https://github.com/ichekrygin), and [Nic](https://github.com/negz), who
had recently joined Upbound and was starting to take on more technical
leadership in Crossplane (plenty more on this in a bit). I developed a deep
respect for the way they approached software architecture and learned a great
deal from them in a few short months. Eventually, Jared reached out about me
potentially joining Upbound.

We were talking about Inception, right? Ah yes, this was the first decision
point for me. Let me tell you, [Bassam](https://github.com/bassam) is a great
leader, and as expected, is incredible at framing. Though extremely excited
about the possibility of working on open source, and specifically Crossplane,
full time, I was hesitant to join because I had only been in my current job for
a few months, and I was concerned about lack of company diversity in the
community. I can’t speak for Bassam, but from my perspective it seemed like he
knew I had a "startup mindset[^7]" because we jumped on a Zoom call and it took
him about 5 minutes to convince me.

I remember the general theme of my conversation with Bassam. He didn’t ask me if
I "wanted to become an old man, filled with regret, waiting to die alone[^8]",
but he did ask whether I wanted to help _create something new_. Creating
something new comes with inherent risk—you are forfeiting the certainty that
comes with working on a known quantity—but the upside is, if I can lean into the
dramatic for a moment, changing the world. In other words, creating something
new requires "taking a leap of faith." With a few sentences, Bassam had framed
the decision in a way that made my answer obvious. However, though the immediate
decision was whether to join Upbound or not, the framing took a deeper root that
would impact how I would look at many future decisions.

A few weeks later, I was in a hotel in Seattle[^9] wrapping up a large
Crossplane PR, looking forward to meeting the team in person the next day.[^10]

> This is a tangent, and I doubt you are even reading this, but if you are…
> [Justin Honold](https://www.linkedin.com/in/justinhonold/), thank you for
> everything you did during this time. I’ll forever be grateful for your wisdom
> and kindness.

## Building Crossplane

Nic Cope had been hired at Upbound a few months before me. Nic and I have very
different backgrounds. One such difference at the time I joined Upbound was that
Nic had somewhat of a who’s who of prestigious tech companies on his resume,
while I had, umm, done some stuff in college I guess? I had already interacted
with Nic while working on Crossplane, but I remember meeting him on my first day
at Upbound and immediately being blown away by his thoughtful approach to
tackling complex engineering problems.

Shortly after I joined Upbound, [Muvaffak](https://github.com/muvaf) would also
start at the company. Nic, Muvaffak, and I became the team working on the "core"
Crossplane components, designing many of the features that users know and
love[^11] today, such as packages and composition. I learned so much from both
Nic and Muvaffak during this time, and we had a ton of fun. Bassam and other
leaders in the company entrusted much of the Crossplane package manager work to
me, which turned out to be an incredibly formative engineering experience. I
developed and refined my own approach to software architecture and
implementation, being guided and course corrected along the way by folks who had
decades of combined experience.

It was also during this time that I got involved in the upstream Kubernetes
community. There are too many folks to thank for the guidance and mentorship I
received[^12], but I would encourage anyone to apply to the SIG Release [shadow
program](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/release-team/shadows.md).
As a result of my involvement through multiple release cycles, I learned a great
deal about how to build open source software, and perhaps more importantly, how
to build open source communities. I was fortunate enough to bring some of the
same practices that I saw demonstrated in upstream Kubernetes to the Crossplane
community.

My most significant involvement in the Crossplane project culminated with the
[v1.0 release](https://blog.crossplane.io/announcing-crossplane-v1-0/), and the
[donation of the project to the
CNCF](https://blog.crossplane.io/crossplane-joins-cncf/).

## Building Upbound

In the Summer of 2021, Upbound was growing and the engineering organization was
evolving. As part of this transition, there were opportunities for folks to take
on new challenges and responsibilities. For the first two years I had been at
Upbound, I had been solely focused on Crossplane, both the project and the
community. However, I missed running production services and getting woken up in
the night by PagerDuty.[^13] There was an opportunity for someone to step into a
leadership position in product engineering, and I took it. I feel now, and felt
then, extremely fortunate to have been trusted in this role, and I hope that all
of the awesome engineers I worked with feel as though I made a positive impact.

We built a number of products over the next ~18 months, some of them more
successful than others. We worked extremely hard and cared about each other—kind
of the ideal scenario if you asked me. We did a lot of things wrong, a few
things right, and a ton of things right after we saw that we had initially done
them wrong. Some of the highlights include building a self-hosted version of
Upbound (which I hope you’ll see again someday), launching the [Upbound
Marketplace](https://marketplace.upbound.io/), which has some pretty fun
[OCI](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/main/spec.md)
goodness behind the scenes, and this week’s launch of the console and managed
control planes.

We were also building the company, with head count more than doubling in size,
and a bunch of new folks coming in and taking over functions that folks like me
were previously doing poorly.[^14] I like to call this the "hiring
professionals" phase. Folks like [Sumbry](https://github.com/sumbry),
[Kelsey](https://github.com/kahavens), and [Tom](https://github.com/tanthony55)
joined, each bringing a wealth of experience and defining what engineering,
marketing, and sales look like at a successful enterprise technology company.
They each brought in whole groups of other awesome new folks as well. I wish I
could name them all here, but I’m already well over the limit of words that
anyone would read about me just doing the normal thing of changing jobs. Y’all
know who you are though.

While it feels like we built so much, it will likely amount to a mere fraction
of all that will be built at Upbound. I won’t be responsible for most of it, but
hopefully when folks go far enough back with their git blame they’ll say "this
Dan guy made some sound decisions given the constraints at the time." That’ll be
enough for me.

#### Some Shout Outs

I’ve mentioned a few of the incredible people at Upbound already, but I would be
remiss if I didn’t take a moment to thank many of the product and engineering
folks I had the privilege to work alongside for an extended period of time:

Thank you [Muvaffak](https://github.com/muvaf), for navigating every stage of
Upbound with me.

Thank you [Dalorion](https://github.com/ldalorion), for being the number 1
Crossplane user both before you joined Upbound and after.

Thank you [Ezgi](https://github.com/ezgidemirel), for your methodical approach
to problem solving.

Thank you [Sergen](https://github.com/sergenyalcin), for your consistency.

Thank you [Piotr](https://github.com/Piotr1215), for your never ending
excitement about all technology.

Thank you [Alper](https://github.com/ulucinar), for thinking deeply and showing
kindness.

Thank you [Hasan](https://github.com/turkenh), for being the definition of a
professional engineer.

Thank you [Taylor](https://github.com/tnthornton), for all the late nights and
weekends. I hope that I was around long enough to experience the last of them at
Upbound.

Thank you [Aaron](https://github.com/AaronME), for being customer 0, even before
the product existed.

Thank you [Michael](https://github.com/thephred), for being an excellent "middle
stack engineer" and an even better human being.

Thank you [Pete](https://github.com/plumbis), for driving all the way to Durham
just to get lunch with me and not to visit your family.

Thank you [Matt](https://github.com/mattheilman), for being as cool as they
come.

Thank you [Bulat](https://github.com/avalanche123), for asking the right
questions.

Thank you [Shane](https://github.com/shanecmiller23), for letting the technology
inform the design.

Thank you [Yury](https://github.com/ytsarev), for your enthusiasm about the
mission of Crossplane.

Thank you [Daren](https://github.com/nullable-eth), for your snarky function
names.

Thank you [Nathan](https://github.com/nlinx), for dreaming about startups with
me.

Thank you [Jason](https://github.com/jastang), for being the best listener I
know.

Thank you [Alain](https://github.com/AlainRoy), for your honesty and willingness
to provide feedback. 

Thank you [Craig](https://github.com/cwilhit), for the beach chat.

Thank you [Sam](https://github.com/samalipio), for venting on Wednesdays.

Thank you [Jean](https://github.com/jeanduplessis), for your pragmatism.

Thank you [Matthias](https://github.com/luebken), for advocating for the user.

And thank you to [Grant](https://github.com/grantgumina). You showed me the
ropes.

## Why leave?

It can feel strange to paint a wonderful picture of a situation, then
intentionally remove yourself from the frame. However, I’m not sure I would be
able to leave Upbound today if the picture didn’t look as great as it does. I
feel proud of what we have built, and I feel confident that the team will
continue to build incredible products and technology (and likely clean up many
of my messes along the way).

I’ve long been passionate about areas of technology that are not on the critical
path for Upbound, namely hardware and low-level software. While I would love to
explore them in the context of Upbound, I am much too pragmatic to venture down
roads that wouldn’t be in best service of the company’s mission. Furthermore,
though there is still much to build at Upbound, I miss the days of being in a
(sometimes virtual) room with a small group of folks and betting on ourselves.

But the real reason I’m leaving, the reason I am walking away from a company,
product, and group of people that I love, is framing. It’s the same framing that
transformed the decision to join Upbound four years ago from questionable to
obvious. I care deeply about an area of technology, and a set of problems that
accompany it, and I’m taking a leap of faith.

## What’s next?

A few logistical items:
- I _will_ continue to be involved in the Crossplane community and will remain a
  maintainer of the project for the time-being.
- I _will not_ be at Kubecon EU in Amsterdam this year. There are a variety of
  factors contributing to me not being able to make it, but I hope to be back at
  Kubecon again soon.
- We’ll see what happens with [doc.crds.dev](https://doc.crds.dev). If you have
  an opinion, feel free to weigh in
  [here](https://github.com/crdsdev/doc/issues/172).

As for what is next for me... you’ll have to wait until Monday :)

[^1]: I let Katie (my wife) read this post before I published it, and she said the hook was much too dramatic. She’s right. She also has had her writing accepted by multiple publications. She’s the kind of person you listen to when they give you feedback on your writing. Yet here I am, existential drama and all, spilling this out on the public internet. It must be super frustrating to live with me...
[^2]: Well this likely isn’t where you saw this going...
[^3]: If you don’t believe this then you probably don’t have a lot of experience with how advertising works.
[^4]: Yep, it was Kubecon.
[^5]: If I had stuck with this motto it would be paying off quite nicely in the current AI climate. That being said, I made the switch to "big fan of computers and human beings", and I don’t think I’ll be getting rid of it any time soon.
[^6]: I have written a large portion of the Crossplane code base and I can assure you that documentation has been one of the hardest problems we have tackled. Thankfully we now have an awesome person ([Pete](https://github.com/plumbis)) focused on making Crossplane docs better than they ever have been!
[^7]: Well that felt pretty cringe to write down.
[^8]: That would have been quite the Zoom call.
[^9]: We used to have an office!
[^10]: Shout out to [Marques](https://github.com/displague), who was onboarding around this time as well. I think you were the first person I had an extended conversation with, and troubleshooting why your XPS was overheating in your backpack calmed a lot of my first day nerves. Working with you at Upbound (and elsewhere!) has been a true pleasure.
[^11]: Most of the time.
[^12]: I mention a few in [this post](https://danielmangum.com/posts/stepping-away-upstream-kubernetes/).
[^13]: Alright, alright I’ll calm down. There is a certain joy in a well-handled incident though.
[^14]: Special shout out to the marketing and sales teams. Also, sorry.