+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-05-10T16:36:56-05:00
title = "Presence vs. Planning"
slug = "presence-vs-planning" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

Sometimes I find it hard to focus on the work I am doing. It can be easy to constantly be evaluating how everything you are doing affects the present, affects your future, and affects those around you. These are good questions to be asking, but at the right time. If we are always planning, how are we ever going to get anything done? On the other hand, if we are never planning, how do we have context when choosing what to do next?

Planning and being present are two of the most important and productive states for us to spend time in. However, when we try to do them at the same time, it can be some of our most unproductive time. Recently, I have been exploring finding the ratio of time to spend on being present vs. planning ahead. It is not lost on me that these kind of questions are not as much of a science as we frequently make them out to be, but I think viewing them at least partially through an analytical lense can be useful.

These are a few of my thoughts and musings on the topic, which ultimately sum to the following broad conclusion: we usually overvalue planning, and undervalue presence.

## Planning Informs Presence, but Not Completely

I have always put a huge empahsis on planning because I have held the opinion that I can't be present unless I am so certain og my plan that I don't have to "think" and can just be fully in the moment. While this meakes sense in theory, it has been my experience that is usually does not play out this simply.

## Plan a Mindset, Not an Action

I graduated from college last December, but I still live with a group of guys who are finishing out their final semester. These have been my best friends over the past few years, and they are moving to San Francisco, New York City, Washington D.C., and Charlotte in a few days. 