+++ 
draft = false
date = 2021-05-22T01:41:34-06:00
title = "Using a ConfigMap as an OCI Image Cache"
slug = "config-map-oci-image-cache" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

For folks familiar with [Crossplane](https://crossplane.io/), you likely know
that we adopt the design practice of using interfaces over implementations as
frequently as possible. Even if we begin with an implementation, such as the
current [composition
engine](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.2/concepts/composition.html), we make sure
to consider a future with [potentially many
implementations](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/1705) for the
same functionality.

One of the places where we have taken advantage of Kubernetes' similar approach
to interfaces is in how we cache Crossplane package images. Crossplane packages
are single-layer [OCI images](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec)
comprised of a single YAML file with a stream of manifests indicating
[CRDs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/#customresourcedefinitions)
to be installed, dependencies on other packages, and
[more](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.2/concepts/packages.html). When running in
the context of Kubernetes, container images are typically pulled via the
`kubelet` communicating with the container runtime on a given `Node`. However,
because of Crossplane's mandate that images adhere to a specific minimal format,
going through the `kubelet` introduces additional overhead and complexity
compared to just deferring to Crossplane downloading the packages directly [^1].
Also, because the package images are so small -- the latest `provider-helm`
[release](https://hub.docker.com/layers/crossplane/provider-helm/v0.7.1/images/sha256-63a3f65673aeb8bd390867e96450de49548f0b9b17faf0c54ed5637727c817a8?context=repo)
is `10.11 KB` and even much larger packages, such as `provider-aws`, are
typically [well
under](https://hub.docker.com/layers/149418057/crossplane/provider-aws/v0.18.1/images/sha256-3b7ef85091737cfa66d4852158fc711845b93958c558176cb09ed4d2bb3d29ea?context=explore)
`1 MB`  -- the overhead of downloading is not extreme.

That being said, we do want to maintain a cache of these package images as
Crossplane continuously ensures that the state of the cluster matches that
dictated by the installed packages, requiring frequent access to their contents.
Crossplane will use an `emptyDir`
[volume](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#emptydir) to cache
these images by default, but for users who prefer more durable or flexible
storage for their cache, it also allows for using a [`PersistentVolumeClaim`
instead](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#persistentvolumeclaims).

In fact, when developing locally or running integration tests, we frequently run
Crossplane with a
[hostPath](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath)
`PersistentVolume`, allowing us to modify the contents of a specific image by
simply copying into a local directory. This is great when running on a local
machine, but is somewhat cumbersome to do if you are a Crossplane end-user (i.e.
requires direct access to `Nodes` in your cluster).

Yesterday I was thinking about how we could reduce the burden on folks who want
to rapidly test their package images without pushing them to a registry then
having Crossplane install them by downloading from it. Essentially, I wanted to
make the development loop feel as "Kubernetes-native" as possible. You might be
thinking to yourself: "Dan, have you heard of the `kubectl cp` command?". As it
turns out, I have! What a useful[^2] little tool! However, `kubectl cp` (and its
good friend `kubectl exec`) are not super useful to us here as the former
requires `tar` to be present in the container and the latter requires, well, at
least something to write file contents. With Crossplane, we are out of luck
because it is built on a
[distroless](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless) base image,
which includes the absolute minimum components for our binary to run. Also,
though `kubectl cp` and `kubectl exec` are commands provided by `kubectl`
itself, they feel more like backdoors than interacting with the Kubernetes API.

So what do Kubernetes users do when they need to store some unstructured data?
You guessed it[^3]: `ConfigMap`. If I was to personify `ConfigMap`, I would
describe it as that friend you have that has zero opinions and will say "sure!"
to almost anything. Need to store some configuration data? I got you. Want me to
handle some definitely sensitive information in plaintext? Say no more. When the
API type you need doesn't exist and you don't want to create _Yet Another CRD™_,
`ConfigMap` is the one that you call. And fortunately for us, `ConfigMap` is
even willing to hold our non-UTF-8 bytes in its `binaryData` field.

Because OCI images are just the highest praised tarballs of all time, they too
can be stored in this `binaryData` field, and `kubectl` even has a handy
shortcut to create a `ConfigMap` from a directory or file:

```console

$ kubectl create configmap package-cache --from-file=my-packages/ -n crossplane-system

```

Let's say I have just [built my Crossplane
package](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.2/getting-started/create-configuration.html#build-and-push-the-configuration)
in the `my-packages` directory:

```console

$ kubectl crossplane build configuration --name=./mypackages/bestpackage.xpkg
$ ls my-packages
bestpackage.xpkg

```

The aforementioned `kubectl create configmap` command will create a `ConfigMap`
with an entry in the `binaryData` map with a key of `bestpackage.xpkg` and value
with the bytes of the package tarball.

```yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: package-cache
  namespace: crossplane-system
binaryData:
  bestpackage.xpkg: c2hhMjU2Ojc5ZDYxYWIxODUxNmNhZTZmZj...

```

That's pretty simple! Now how do we get that into Crossplane? Fortunately,
Kubernetes lets us mount `ConfigMaps` as a volume on a `Pod`, so we can just
replace the `emptyDir` in the [core
Crossplane](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/blob/6622b161b25658e82f2d17db2b2511ecaec31dee/cluster/charts/crossplane/templates/deployment.yaml#L86)
`Deployment` with our `ConfigMap`:

```yaml

    volumeMounts:
      - mountPath: /cache
        name: package-cache
...
volumes:
  - name: package-cache
    configMap:
        name: package-cache

```

Now, when we install a `Configuration` with a source image that matches an
identifier that is already in our package cache, and a `packagePullPolicy:
Never`, Crossplane will look at the `ConfigMap`, see that our package is
present, and read its contents to install it.

```yaml

apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
  name: best-package
spec:
  package: bestpackage
  packagePullPolicy: Never

```

This is great, and updating our `ConfigMap` will even be reflected in our
mounted volume path in the core Crossplane container, so we can update the
package contents on the fly, or add new ones.

But this has to be too good to be true right? Well, besides the fact that
`ConfigMaps` are certainly not designed to be reliable persistent data stores,
there are a few other problems we can encounter:

1. `ConfigMap` volumes are read only, which means that if you try to actually
   install a package from a registry, Crossplane will fail to cache its contents
   because the path will not be writeable. This is especially a problem when the
   package we loaded into the cache has dependencies on packages that are not in
   the cache.
2. `ConfigMaps` have a size limit of `1 MiB`[^4]. Even with our tiny Crossplane
   packages, we can run up on that quite quickly.

That being said, this workflow is only for development, so these limitations may
be acceptable. An option for making this more usable in the future could involve
supporting a `ConfigMap` volume source natively in the Crossplane Helm chart,
and then supporting separate paths for a "read-only" cache and a "read-write"
cache.

However, a potentially less disruptive solution for tackling this problem is to
inject a small `initContainer` into the core Crossplane `Pod` that copies data
from our `ConfigMap` volume into whatever volume is configured for our package
cache. This allows for dynamic loading (and unloading) of local packages without
requiring that we actually use a `ConfigMap` as our long-term cache. When
automated with something like [`up`](https://github.com/upbound/up), this is
quite a pleasant experience.

<script id="asciicast-415681" src="https://asciinema.org/a/415681.js" async></script>

You'll notice that the package we install, `bestpackage`, has a source of
`bestpackage`, which is the data we loaded using our `ConfigMap` and
`initContainer`. However, it declares dependencies on `provider-aws` and
`provider-helm`, which are both fetched from the [Upbound
Registry](https://www.upbound.io/registry) and stored in our `emptyDir` package
cache. This gives us the best of both worlds as we don't have to manually load a
package's whole dependency tree when we are only developing at its layer.

## Closing Thoughts

While using a `ConfigMap` as any meaningful form of storage is ill-advised,
hacks such as this one help us rethink how the tools we interact with every day
actually work. It also serves as a demonstration of the many ways in which
Crossplane is built to be extended, something I hope to explore further in
coming posts.

Send me a message [@hasheddan](https://twitter.com/hasheddan) on Twitter for any
questions or comments!


[^1]: Downloading package images directly also means that we have more control over what "pulling a package" means, once again providing an interface that enables multiple implementations behind the API line. But that's a story for another day ;)
[^2]: And potentially [horrifingly dangerous](https://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2019-1002101/#:~:text=Vulnerability%20Details%20%3A%20CVE%2D2019%2D,containers%20and%20the%20user%20machine.&text=An%20attacker%20could%20use%20this,permissions%20of%20the%20local%20user.)...
[^3]: It was in the title, but we could all use some extra wins these days!
[^4]: Ah yes, the good ol' Megabyte (MB) vs Mebibyte (MiB) [distinction](https://blog.digilentinc.com/mib-vs-mb-whats-the-difference/). I hate this just as much as you do, but I'm just glad we can all agree that numbers should [always be represented as base 2](http://gph.is/2hwqCGg).
