+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-05-24T12:19:59-05:00
title = "Automatically Tagging AWS ENIs"
slug = "" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

Back in 2011, AWS [announced Elastic Network Interfaces](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/new-elastic-network-interfaces-in-the-virtual-private-cloud/). This effectively decoupled the networking capabilities of an EC2 instance from the hardware, and allowed a single instance to "exist" in two discrete subnets. Most AWS users end up not really utilizing this feature. Because of the extreme customizability of EC2 instance size, storage, and speed, as well as the advent of many other AWS components, users opt to create multiple instances, each with a single ENI, rather than attaching multiple to the same instance. For this reason, many users essentially never interact with ENI's directly. They simply create an EC2 instance, a default ENI is created for them, and whenever the instance is terminated, the ENI dies with it.

To be honest, this is usually just fine. If you are running an AWS account that doesn't have a lot of components, or at least doesn't have a lot of different kinds of components, you probably won't run into trouble. Even if you are running a very complex AWS account, you can probably get away with ignoring ENIs in your tagging strategy because it doesn't cost anything (except for clutter) to have ENIs floating around that you don't need.

But let's say you do want to tag your ENIs, or you want to tag anything that is provisioned automatically but doesn't support tagging on launch. One way to do this is to create a lambda that regularly looks for untagged ENIs, then copies tags from its corresponding EC2 instance (or other resource) to it. To start, the easiest way to identify resources failing to meet certain tagging conditions is using AWS Config.