+++ 
draft = false
date = 2024-06-15T01:41:34-06:00
title = "Wireframes are Cheap, Engineering Should Be Too"
slug = "wireframes-cheap-engineering-too" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

I have spent the majority of my career in engineering roles at startups. Both at
companies I have worked at, and in the general startup ecosystem, I have
frequently heard some variation of the refrain “engineers are expensive, but
wireframes are cheap”. While I align with the underlying sentiment that doing
the least amount of work to get customer signal is optimal, the phrase has
always bothered me.

As an engineering leader, I do not want the rest of the organization to view the
work that my colleagues and I do as some luxury that should only be leveraged
after we have reached complete confidence that a product or feature needs to be
built. At the same time, making a large investment in building something that
never reaches general availability can be fatal for a small company. However, I
think “how can we avoid involving engineering?” is the wrong question to be
asking. Rather, organizations should be asking “why is involving engineering so
expensive?”.

The engineering cost of building a product is a function of the experience and
abilities of the engineers, as well as the pre-existing infrastructure that is
already in place. Much ink has already been spilled on hiring and training good
engineers, and the value of doing so cannot be overstated. However, despite the
prognostications of some generative artificial intelligence optimists, I have
yet to encounter a successful organization that views engineers as highly
fungible assets. Infrastructure, on the other hand, is much easier to augment
and often times higher leverage.

While it has become a severely overloaded term at this point, I view
infrastructure as the parts of a system that reduce the cost and blast radius of
introducing new or removing existing functionality. If engineering is viewed as
disproportionately expensive in an organization, it is likely that there has
been under-investment in infrastructure. It can be easy to find oneself in this
position, as infrastructure is not directly tied to user-facing features.
Building it requires advocacy by engineering leaders, and trust from other parts
of the business.

I have found the answer to the following question to be a good litmus test of
whether sufficient investment has been made in infrastructure.

> How comfortable are you with introducing a poorly engineered service in
> production?

The answer depends on how easy it is to:

- Expose the service to a limited subset of users.
- Isolate the behavior and any side effects of the service.
- Remove or replace the service.

While I would generally not advocate for intentionally building low quality
software, being able to slide the quality bar towards prototyping without
negatively impacting other parts of the system is a valuable capability.
Organizations that have it are frequently able to operate more efficiently than
those who habitually defer engineering work because they get higher fidelity
signal on the usefulness of a product or feature, and the path from experiment
to general availability is much clearer.

If you find yourself in an organization where the cost of engineering is high,
consider an investment in your infrastructure.
