+++ 
draft = false
date = 2021-06-18T01:41:34-06:00
title = "RISC-V Bytes: Caller and Callee Saved Registers"
slug = "risc-v-bytes-caller-callee-registers" 
tags = []
categories = ["RISC-V Bytes"]
+++

> This is part of a new series I am starting on the blog where we’ll explore
> [RISC-V](https://riscv.org/) by breaking down real programs and explaining how
> they work. You can view all posts in this series on the [RISC-V Bytes
> page](https://danielmangum.com/categories/risc-v-bytes).

When looking at the generated assembly for a function, you may have noticed that
the first few instructions involve moving values from registers to the stack,
then loading those values back into the same registers before returning. In this
post we'll explore why this is happening, why certain registers are used, and
how behavior guarantees make life easier for compiler authors and enable
software portability.

## Defining Terms

Before we dive into what is happening there, let's define some terms and take a
look at the 32 general purpose registers supported in the RISC-V instruction
set.

- **Caller**: a procedure that calls one or more more subsequent procedure(s).
- **Callee**: a procedure that is called by another.
- **Application Binary Interface (ABI)**: a standard for register usage and
  memory layout that allows for programs that are not compiled together to
  interact effectively.
- **Calling Conventions**: a subset of an ABI specifically focused on how data
  is passed from one procedure to another.

Importantly, a procedure may be both a _caller_ and a _callee_.

Now let's take a look at the RISC-V registers:


Name    | ABI Mnemonic | Calling Convention     | Preserved across calls?
--------|--------------|------------------------|------------------------
x0      | zero         | Zero                   | n/a
x1      | ra           | Return address         | No
x2      | sp           | Stack pointer          | Yes
x3      | gp           | Global pointer         | n/a
x4      | tp           | Thread pointer         | n/a
x5-x7   | t0-t2        | Temporary registers    | No
x8-x9   | s0-s1        | Saved registers        | Yes
x10-x17 | a0-a7        | Argument registers     | No
x18-x27 | s2-s11       | Saved registers        | Yes
x28-x31 | t3-t6        | Temporary registers    | No

You'll notice the second column refers to the _Application Binary Interface
(ABI)_ and the third refers to the _Calling Convention_, both of which we
defined earlier. This likely makes intuitive sense: if we all agree to use
certain registers for specific purposes, we can expect data to be there without
having to explicitly say that it is.

The fourth column may be a bit more opaque. While this table uses _Preserved
across calls?_ as a designation, you will frequently see all of the registers
with _Yes_ in the column referred to as **callee-saved** and those with _No_ as
**caller-saved**. This once again is related to how procedures communicate. It
is great to agree on the purpose of our registers, but we also need to define
what responsibilites a procedure has when interacting with them. In order for a
register to be preserved across calls, the callee must make sure its value is
the same when it returns to the caller as it was when the callee was, well,
called!


## An Example

The simplest example is the `main` function. You may be tempted to think that
`main` would be an example of a procedure that is only a caller. In reality, it
is called after some initial setup, which can very greatly depending on the
language and the compiler. Almost every procedure is a callee, and only _leaf
procedures_ are not callers.

We'll be using our program from [last
post](https://danielmangum.com/posts/risc-v-bytes-qemu-gdb/) to show how
registers are preserved. In this case, `main` is being called by `_start` and it
calls `printf`.

```
(gdb) disass main
Dump of assembler code for function main:
   0x0000000000010158 <+0>:     addi       sp,sp,-32
   0x000000000001015a <+2>:     sd         ra,24(sp)
   0x000000000001015c <+4>:     sd         s0,16(sp)
   0x000000000001015e <+6>:     addi       s0,sp,32
   0x0000000000010160 <+8>:     li         a5,1
   0x0000000000010162 <+10>:    sw         a5,-20(s0)
   0x0000000000010166 <+14>:    li         a5,2
   0x0000000000010168 <+16>:    sw         a5,-24(s0)
   0x000000000001016c <+20>:    lw         a4,-20(s0)
   0x0000000000010170 <+24>:    lw         a5,-24(s0)
   0x0000000000010174 <+28>:    addw       a5,a5,a4
   0x0000000000010176 <+30>:    sw         a5,-28(s0)
   0x000000000001017a <+34>:    lw         a5,-28(s0)
   0x000000000001017e <+38>:    mv         a1,a5
   0x0000000000010180 <+40>:    lui        a5,0x1c
   0x0000000000010182 <+42>:    addi       a0,a5,176 # 0x1c0b0
   0x0000000000010186 <+46>:    jal        ra,0x10332 <printf>
   0x000000000001018a <+50>:    li         a5,0
   0x000000000001018c <+52>:    mv         a0,a5
   0x000000000001018e <+54>:    ld         ra,24(sp)
   0x0000000000010190 <+56>:    ld         s0,16(sp)
   0x0000000000010192 <+58>:    addi       sp,sp,32
   0x0000000000010194 <+60>:    ret
End of assembler dump.
```

> You may be thinking to yourself: why do we need so many instructions that just
> store a register into memory, then immediately load it back? Good question! We
> don't! For simplicity here, we are compiling using `gcc` without any
> optimization. This essentially means that each source line is assembled in a
> vacuum without much consideration of the surrounding context. While this is
> inefficient and leads to a much larger program size, it can be useful for
> learning. Take a look at this program [on Compiler
> Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/hExE7v6h4) and hover over the output to see
> which instructions map to each source line. We'll explore how different
> optimization levels change code generation in a future post.

Let's start from the top. The first thing you'll notice is that we are
decreasing the value in `sp`, our stack pointer register. Our first four
instructions here are commonly referred to as the _function prologue_. For
today's post we are going to be primarily focusing on it and the _function
epilogue_ because these sections are where we perform the bookkeeping operations
that are necessary to conform to calling conventions.

When we move the stack pointer, we are essentially incrementing or decrementing
the size of our stack. In RISC-V, the stack grows downwards, so `addi sp, sp,
-32` is increasing the size of our downward growing stack by changing the stack
pointer to contain an address 32 bytes lower.

Next we want to push the saved registers onto the stack. Let's pause for a
moment and think about why we need to do this. If the registers are designated
as "saved", can we not just leave them untouched throughout the body of our
procedure, keeping them intact when we return to the procedure that called us?
This is true in some scenarios, but what if we call another procedure in our
body? For instance, take a look at `<+42>` where we call `printf`. Here we are
specifying that we want to jump to the location of the `printf` procedure and
set the contents of register `ra` to the address of the program counter plus
four (`ra <- PC + 4`). This will inform `printf` to return to the address of the
next instruction in our `main` body (`<+50>`). However, when `printf` does
return, we need to know how to return to the procedure that called us
(`_start`).

If we hadn't saved the contents of `ra` in the prologue (`<+2>`), we would have
lost that address, but because we pushed it onto the stack, we can pop it back
off in the epilogue (`<+54>`) and return to `_start`. Meanwhile, in the rest of
the procedure body, we are free to use the register as needed.

You'll also notice that we are pushing `s0` onto the stack in the prologue
(`<+4>`). Besides being a saved register, `s0` is [used as the _frame pointer_
if one
exists](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/blob/388954fc835e782cbedffcdb502cf816bd978771/riscv-elf.md#integer-register-convention-).
The stack frame is the area of the stack reserved for the current procedure and
it stretches from the _frame pointer_ to the _stack pointer_. Procedures will
use the frame pointer with an offset to push values onto the stack, such as a
variable that is only in-scope for that procedure (e.g. `<+10>`). In this way,
the frame pointer is a boundary, making sure one procedure does not corrupt the
stack of another.

For this reason, it is imperative that the frame pointer is kept intact
throughout the body of the procedure. Since `_start` is expecting its frame
pointer to be unmodified after calling `main`, we must:

1. Store it in the stack frame for `main` (`<+4>`).
2. Set the new frame pointer for `main` (`<+6>`). You'll notice the frame
   pointer now contains the address the stack pointer contained when our
   procedure began.
3. Restore it before returning (`<+56>`).

Likewise, we will also restore the stack pointer (`<+58>`), as you'll remember
it is a callee-saved register as well. Together, these operations ensure that
the stack frame is consistent throughout the execution of a procedure, no matter
how many other procedures it calls.

## Concluding Thoughts

While we have only scratched the surface of the benefits of ABI-compatibility in
this post, we can already begin to see its value. In future posts, we'll take a
look at how a standardized ABI is even more important when depending on shared
libraries, as well as examine some more complex examples of passing data between
procedures. As always, these post are meant to serve as a useful resource for
folks who are interested in learning more about RISC-V and low-level software in
general. If I can do a better job of reaching that goal, or you have any
questions or comments, please feel free to send me a message
[@hasheddan](https://twitter.com/hasheddan) on Twitter!
