+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-06-25T23:17:48-05:00
title = "What Happens When Crossplane"
slug = "what-happens-when-crossplane" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

*This post is inspired by [What Happens When K8s](https://github.com/jamiehannaford/what-happens-when-k8s), a wonderful walkthrough by Jamie Hannaford that describes execution flow when you type `kubectl run`.*

If you are not familiar with Crossplane, it is a project with the stated vision of becoming the open source multi-cloud control plane. Whether you are aware of it or not, you have probably used a control plane before. The AWS / GCP / Azure CLI's, Web UI's, and client libraries are all examples of control planes (for more information on difference between control plane and data plane look [here](http://sdntutorials.com/difference-between-control-plane-and-data-plane/)). Crossplane brings together these control planes and introduces a separation of concern between operators and developers. That means that operators are responsible for defining the universe of infrastructure components available to developers and the ways in which they can be configured. Developers are responsible for requesting an instance of a resource class that has been made available.

Speaking of resource classes, this would be a great time to get into what the different types of objects exist in Crossplane. Being built on top of the Kubernetes API machinery, Crossplane uses Custom Resource Definitions to define objects. The Kubernetes documentation states that, "On their own, custom resources simply let you store and retrieve structured data". Crossplane utilizes a number of custom resources. These can be broadly grouped into the following: `ResourceClass`, `ResourceClaim`, and `Concrete Resource`.
