+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-08-16T11:32:12-05:00
title = "Reconciling in Concert"
slug = "reconciling-in-concert" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

If you follow me on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/hasheddan) or have looked at any of my work on [GitHub](https://github.com/hasheddan), you are most likely aware that I work on an open source project called [Crossplane](https://crossplane.io/). I will not go through all of the aspects of the project here, but I do want to focus on a pattern that we use to extend the Kubernetes API.

Kubernetes has a number of built-in objects (such as Pods, Deployments, ReplicaSets, etc.), but also allows you to define your own via [CustomResourceDefinitions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/) (which are actually a built-in object themselves). When you create a CRD, you can then create instances of the object defined by that CRD, and Kubernetes will validate their fields for you. It is very similar to defining an API endpoint using a tool like [Swagger](https://swagger.io/).

Kubernetes also allows you to create controllers to watch for events on these custom objects. Controllers contain a reconcile function that responds to these events by evaluating the current status of the object and taking steps to make it match the desired state if it does not already. This again is much like a server that handles API requests. However, there is additional room for creativity with the Kubernetes platform because you can have multiple controllers watching the same events on the same object. This is a powerful feature, but requires careful design of a system such that these controllers are not competing to act on the object's events. Ideally, when multiple controllers are acting on the same object kind, you would like them to reconcile in concert.

## Some Background on Crossplane

As promised, I will not enumerate every feature available in Crossplane in this post, but it is useful to understand the general architecture. Since we are focused on extending the Kubernetes API, let's look at what CRD's Crossplane introduces:

* **Resource Claims:** abstract ("portable") resources that have representation on multiple cloud provider platforms.
    * `bucket.storage.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `rediscluster.cache.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `kubernetescluster.compute.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `mysqlinstance.database.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `postgresqlinstance.database.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
* **Resource Classes:** objects that store configuration details needed to provision a specific managed resource on a single cloud provider platform.
    * `s3bucketclass.storage.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `bucketclass.storage.storage.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `cloudsqlinstanceclass.databace.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `aksclusterclass.compute.azure.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * etc...
* **Managed Resources:** objects that represent an external resource 1-to-1. They are created when a claim is created and use provisioning details in the resource class referenced by the claim.
    * `s3bucket.storage.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `bucket.storage.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `cloudsqlinstance.databace.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `akscluster.compute.azure.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * etc...
* **Policies:** objects that specify default resource class instances for claims that do not explicitly reference a resource class.
    * `bucketpolicy.storage.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `redisclusterpolicy.cache.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `kubernetesclusterpolicy.compute.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `mysqlinstancepolicy.database.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`
    * `postgresqlinstancepolicy.database.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`

Crossplane also includes a number of controller types that watch creation, update, and deletion of instances of the kinds listed above:

* **Default Controllers:** there is a default controller for every abstract kind (i.e. `bucket.storage.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`, `mysqlinstance.database.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`, etc.). These watch for the events on instances of their specified claim kind and if an instance does not explicitly reference a resource class, the controller will reconcile the claim by searching for a policy instance for that kind and setting the claim's class reference to the class that the policy specifies as default. If the claim already has a class reference, the default controller will not attempt to reconcile it.
* **Claim Controllers:** there is a claim controller for every managed kind (i.e. `bucket.storage.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`, `cloudsqlinstance.databace.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`). They also watch for events on instances of their specified claim kind, but do not reconcile them unless they have a class reference already set. If they do have a class reference set (either they were created with one, or it was added by the default controller) then the controller will use the claim and the referenced class to create an instance of the specified managed kind.
* **Managed Controllers:** there is a managed controller for every managed kind (i.e. `bucket.storage.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`, `cloudsqlinstance.databace.gcp.crossplane.io/v1alpha1`).

## Concert Reconciliation in Crossplane

Dynamic provisioning of an external managed service via Crossplane can involve a number of objects and controllers. For this post, we will explore the dynamic provisioning of a GCP Cloud Memorystore instance using resource class defaulting. First we create a `CloudMemorystoreInstanceClass`. It will contain the provisioning details for the external resource we eventually create in GCP, and it can be referenced by multiple claims. 