+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-08-24T23:41:07-05:00
title = "A Thousand Tiny Steps"
slug = "a-thousand-tiny-steps" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

In another life, I was twice as big as I am now and played inside linebacker on a nationally ranked high school football team (this sounds much more impressive than it was in reality). I had a terrific position coach at the time who was foundational in teaching us the fundamentals of the game. He had one phrase that he would always repeat: "A thousand tiny steps".

As I have transitioned to working on open source software full-time, I have found this maxim echoing in my head. Building in the open is a fundamental exchange of efficiency for long-term market fit. In many ways, it is similar to the mindset we had as linebackers: we knew that we could get to the person we were trying to either tackle or cover much quicker if we took long strides toward them. However, by choosing not to take those long strides, we were acknowledging a few key facts:

1. We did not have all available information, and the longer we waited, the more information we would have.
2. The player we were pursuing was a moving target. It would be highly uncommon if the player did not move at all over the course of time. In fact, it was likely that they would move a lot, and in different directions at different times.
3. If we stood completely still, we would be sacrificing ground that we would later have to make up for after obtaining sufficient information to determine our direction.

## Pace vs. Progress

Moving quickly does not always equal moving forward. In fact, moving too quickly can often result in at best stagnation and at worst regression. In football, your goal as a defender is for your path to intersect that of the ball carrier at a specific point. Therefore, there is a window of execution that is ever narrowing as you move closer to it. The more you lack in athletic ability (which I certainly was lacking relative to my peers), the narrower this window is at the beginning of the play.

Open source projects can often have a narrow window of execution of as well.
