+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-08-03T19:07:58-05:00
title = "Please Mind Your Metaphors"
slug = "please-mind-your-metaphors" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

I spend a lot of time explaining Crossplane, Kubernetes, and distributed systems to people from all walks of life. I often find myself using metaphors to describe how a system works: "Kubernetes is like an overbearing boss, delegating tasks to different workers and then checking in to make sure they are carrying out the work as expected". I also see many others, especially in the more niche fields of software, following this same pattern. However, over time I have found this to be the wrong approach. Jumping to the use of metaphors immediately makes assumptions about your audience's ability to comprehend and your ability to explain, and it can "omit free knowledge". Allow me to explain...

## Do You Really Know Your Audience?

I have heard about 1,000,000 conference talks that begin with: "Raise your hand if you are using X in production". While this is an efficient method of gauging a room, it turns a spectrum of experience into a binary evaluation. In doing so, you are assuming that a group is more interested in walking out of your talk feeling confident than they are in achieving pure new knowledge. When I listen to a technical talk, I love walking out with a long list of terms that I have no idea what they mean. When this happens, the speaker has not only given me the knowledge that is contained in their talk, but also a large set of trailheads to embark on new learning adventures in every direction.

## Are You Competent to Speak?

Yes. Yes you are competent to speak. Whether you are at a conference, writing a blog post, or being asked a question face-to-face, you are in that position because someone chose to listen to you or found you worthwhile to ask. If there are parts of a topic that you do not understand, feel free to say so! I would argue that it is much better to leave a few "this happens and I don't know why" holes in a story than it is to abstract the entire process away. 

## Did You Maximize your time?

If you are using a metaphor to communicate an idea to your audience, a large part of your message is already known. The entire purpose of a metaphor is to use a process that is already well understood. However, if you start with a metaphor, you are either putting a cap on the amount of learning that can happen during an engagement, or wasting time talking about something in abstract terms that you will define precisely later on.

## Conclusions

Let me be clear: metaphors are not *always* a bad approach. Sometimes they are a useful abstraction when you have limited time or the audience doesn't want to know exactly how something works. I don't believe you should never use metaphors. However, I do believe that they are grossly overused in software. I encourage you to check yourself next time you come up with a brilliant metaphor and see if it is really doing yourself or your audience a disservice. I would appreciate all of you holding me accountable in this area as well.