+++ 
draft = true
date = 2018-08-31T17:44:14-05:00
title = "Merge Sort vs. Quick Sort"
slug = "merge-sort-vs-quick-sort" 
tags = []
categories = []
+++

Two of the most prominent sorting algorithms used in computer programming are *merge sort* and *quick sort*. While the performance appears to be rather similar for these alogrithms, there are specific scenarios in which one is superior to the other.

Before we examine these cases, let's look at hour each algorithm works.

### Merge Sort

The basic premise behind merge sort is taking a data structure (usually an array) and dividing it down into the smallest possible units of that type of data structure.

For instance, if using an array of length 8, merge sort would first break that array down into 8 arrays of length 1, before then merging them together in an ordered manner.

To accomplish this, merge sort uses the concept of recursion.

```
class MergeSort {

    public void sort(int[] arr, int left, int right) {

        if (left < right) {

            int middle = (left + right) / 2;

            sort(arr, left, middle);
            sort(arr, middle+1, right);

            merge(arr, left, middle, right);
        }
    }

    public void merge(int[], int left, int m, int right) {}
}
```

## Quick Sort

Quick sort also uses recursion, but instead of dividing into new arrays, it does its sorting in-place (we will come back to this when talking about space complexity).

The first step is choosing a partition to start at. Some implementatios choose the first or last element, but we will choose the middle as our partition.

```
class QuickSort {


    public void partition(int[] arr, int high, low) {

    }
}
```

Partitioning is pretty straightforward, but the more complex part of the algorithm is when we call the partitioning function. We know we want to sort the entire array, but how can we make sure that happens? If you aren't familiar with recursion, [this](https://www.codeproject.com/Articles/32873/Recursion-made-simple) is a helpful article to understand the basics. The essential idea is that we want to break every problem down into a smaller one.

```
class QuickSort {

    public void sort(int[] arr, int high, low) {

    }

    public void partition(int[] arr, int high, low) {

    }
}
```

# Run Time Complexity

The most commonly referenced metric when evaluating algorithms (and for good reason) is the run time. Usually you evaluate the best, worst, and average case for the run time.

Both of the algorithms we are discussing today are excellent (relative to other sorting algorithms) in terms of run time. This is one of the major reasons they are so widely employed. However, we will see that though they have the same average run time, one can be more performant than the other depending on the scenario.

At their average case, both algorithms are ```O(n log n)```. However, quick sort in a rare worst case, can have performance of ```O(n^2)```. Let's look at when this occurs.

First, we should think about how the algorithm works.

# Space Complexity

# Stability